 Procedia Computer Science   46  ( 2015 )  725  731 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
1877-0509  2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
).Peer-review under responsibility of organizing committee of the International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies (ICICT 2014)
doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2015.02.136 ScienceDirect
International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies (ICICT 2014)
 An Efficient CRM
-Data Mining Framework for the Prediction of 
Customer Behaviour
 Femina Bahari T
a,*, Sudheep Elayidom M
b aResearch Scholar, Cochin University
 of Science & Technology, Kochi
- 682022, India
 bAssociate Professor,
 Cochin University
 of Science & Technology, Kochi
- 682022, India
 Abstract
 CRM-data mining framework establishes close customer relationships and manages relationship between organizations
 and 
customers in
 todays advanced 
world of businesses. Data mining has gained popularity in various CRM applications in recent 
years and classification model is an important data mining
 technique useful in the field. The model is used to predict the 
behaviour of customers
 to enhance the decision
-making processes for retaining valued customers. An efficient CRM
-data mining 
framework is proposed in this paper and two classification models, Nave Bayes and Neural Networks are studied
 to show
 that 
the accuracy of Neural Network is comparatively better
.   201
4 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
 Peer
-review under responsibility of organizing committee of the International Conference on Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICICT 2014).
 Keywords:
 data mining framework;
 customer relationship management;
 prediction;classification.
 1. Introduction
 Data mining
15 is defined as a process that uses mathematical, statistical, arti
cial intelligence and machine
-learning techniques to extract and identify useful information and subsequently gain knowledge from databases. 
Information technology tools, advanced
 internet technologies and explosion in customer data has improved
 the 
opportunities for marketing and has changed the way relationships between organisations and their customers are 
  * Corresponding author. Tel.: +91
-9946012111; 
 E-mail address:
 feminabahari@gmail.com
  2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
).Peer-review under responsibility of organizing committee of the International Conference on Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICICT 2014)
726   T. Femina Bahari and M. Sudheep Elayidom  /  Procedia Computer Science   46  ( 2015 )  725  731 
managed
3. Customer Relationship Management helps in building
 long term and pro
table relationships with 
valuable
 customers
7. The set of processes and other useful systems in CRM help
 in developing a business strategy 
and this enterprise approach understand
s and in
uence
s the
 customer behaviour through meaningful 
communications
 so that cu
stomer acquisition, customer loyalty, customer retention and customer pro
tability
 are 
improved. The key factor in the development of a competitive CRM strategy
 is the understanding and analyzing 
 of 
customer behaviour and this helps in
 acquiring
 and retai
ning
 potential customers so as to maximize customer value
4. CRM
-data mining framework helps organizations to identify valuable customers and predict their future.
 Each CRM 
element can be supported by various data mining models based on the tasks performed.
 Data mining can be used in organizations for decision making and forecasting and one of the most common 
learning models in data mining that predicts the future customer behaviours
4 is classification. The prediction is done 
by the classification of databas
e records into a number of prede
ned classes based on certain 
criteria
1, 8
. Neural 
networks, decision trees, naive bayes, 
 logistic regression and SVM are the common to
ols used for classi
cation.
 To illustrate the performance of classification models we consider the CRM applications such as
 customer 
segmentation,
 prospecting and acquisition, affinity and cross sell,
 profitability, retention and attrition, risk analyses, 
etc9  in banking domain.
 Instead of mass campaign banks focus on direct marketing campaigns as one measure to 
improve customer development. 
The banks use the data available to retain its best customers and to identify 
opportunities to sell them additional services
11. Two classification models, the Multilayer 
Perception  
Neural  
Network  (MLPNN) which  have  their  roots  in  the  artificial intelligence
5,13
 and  Nave  Bayes (NB)  classifier, a 
simple probabilistic classifier based on applying Bayes'  theorem 
14 are used for the study.
 This paper proposes an effective CRM
-data mining framework
 and investigates the effectiveness of the two 
classification models in data mining in predicting the behaviour of customers in CRM application. An application in 
the bank direct marketing campaign is selected for the performance comparison of multilayer perception neural 
network and nave bayes classifier. The data set is well known as bank marketing
 data
 from the University of 
California at Irvine
 (UCI)
11. To assess the classifier performance, classification metrics such as accuracy rate, 
sensitivity analysis and specificity can be used
11.  The tool used for the study is Weka.
 The remaining sections of the article are organized as Section 2 which covers the data used in the work and 
Section 3 specifies the Problem Statement. Section 4 describes the CRM
-data mining framework, section 5 
describes the main concepts used in the work, section 6 illustrates the implementation logic, section 7 analyzes the 
test results and finally section 8 concludes the article.
 2. Data Sets Used
 The dataset used for experiments in this paper, contains results of direct bank marketing campaigns
11. It includes 
17 campaigns of a Portuguese bank conducted between May 2008 and November 2010. The customer was offered a 
long
-term deposit application by contact over phone. The dataset contains 45211 instances with two possible 
outcomes 
 either the client signed for the long
-term deposit or not. In our experimental dataset 10% of the pre 
processed dataset is used and it contains 16 input variables. Eight variables relate to the client, four variables relate 
to the last contact of the current campaign and another four relate to the campaign: 
  age, average yearly balance in Euros (numeric),
  job type,
 marital status, education (categorical),
  whether the client has credit in default, whether the client has a loan (binary), 
  whether the client has a personal loan (binary). 
  contact communication type, last contact month of year (categorical), 
  last contact day of the month, last contact
 duration in seconds (numeric).
  number of contacts performed before and during this campaign and for this client 
(numeric), 
  number of days that passed by after the client was last contacted from a previous campaign(numeric)
 ,  outcome of the previous marketing campaign (categorical). 
 The  output  variable  corresponds  to  campaign  output,  which  has  been  reduced  to  a binary output which 
indicates whether the customer subscribes to a deposit scheme or not.
 727 T. Femina Bahari and M. Sudheep Elayidom  /  Procedia Computer Science   46  ( 2015 )  725  731 
3. Problem Statement 
 To propose an efficient CRM
-data mining framework for the prediction of customer behaviour in the domain of 
banking applications. Within the framework proposed, two classification models are studied and evaluated.
 4. CRM-Data M
ining 
Framework
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
       Fig. 1.
 CRM
data mining framework
.   The proposed CRM
-data mining framework is
 shown in Fig.
 1. Understanding the business goals and 
requirements of the problem domain forms the initial phase of any problem in data mining. A close study and 
management of customer relationships and their interactions will help to identify attract and
 retain effective 
customers in the domain. The next phase of data preparation or preprocessing helps in preparing the data by the 
processes of cleaning, attribute selection, data transformation etc for further building up of models and their 

evaluation. Model construction in the CRM framework is a major step in which effective model to satisfy the 

business requirements is constructed. These models help in predicting the behaviour of the customers. Model 

evaluation and visualization measure the effectiveness
 of the model for enhancing their performance. 
 Customer 
Identification
 Customer Attraction 
and Retention
 Customer 
Development
 Business/Domain Understanding
 Data Preparation/ 
Pre
-processing
 Model Building
 Association
 Regression
 Classificatio
n Forecasting
 Clustering
 Model Evaluation
 Visualization
 728   T. Femina Bahari and M. Sudheep Elayidom  /  Procedia Computer Science   46  ( 2015 )  725  731 
5. Concepts used 
 5.1.
 Multilayer 
Perception
 Neural
 Network (MLPNN)  
 Multilayer  perception  neural  network (MLPNN) structure
5,13,16
  is organized as a layered set of neurons. Among 
the input, output and hidden layers
 of neurons
5 the actual computations of the network are performed
 in the hidden 
layer, where each neuron sums its input attributes
 xi after multiplying them by the strengths of the respective 
connection weights 
wij.  The activation function (AF) of this
 sum
 gives the output 
yj and sigmoid function
16 is the AF 
used in the experiment.
  yj = f (wij,
 xi)                                                                                                                               
                           (1)
  Back
-propagation (BP)
 learning
 is the most
 common training technique used for MLPNN
2. The sum of squared 
differences between the desired and asset value of the output neuron's E is defined as:  
  E = 
j (yd j 
- yj) 2                                                                                                                            
                       (2)
  Where 
yj is the output of a
 neuron
 j whose desired value is
 yd j 
. Weights  
wi,j
  in  equation  (1),  are  adjusted  to  
finding the minimum error 
E of equation (2) as early
 as possible. 
The difference between  the  network  out
puts  and  
the  desired  ones
 is reduced by the application of weight correction
 by BP. The neural networks helps in
 learning
, and reducing
 the future errors
5. Good learning ability, fast  real
-time operation, less memory demand, analysis of 
complex patterns are some of the advantages
 of MLPNN and
 the disadvantages include high
-quality data
 requirement of the network, careful selection of variables
 a priori and so on
16. 5.2.
 Naive Bayes (NB)
 Bayesian  classifiers  are  helpful  in  predicting  the probability  that  a  sample  belongs  to  a  particular  class. 
The technique is used for large databases because of its high accuracy and fastness to train with simple models. To 
estimate the parameters (means and variances of the variables) n
ecessary for classification, the classifier requires 
only a small amount of training data. It also handles
  real and discrete data
5.  We can use Bayes rule as the basis for designing learning algorithms, as follows: To learn some target function 
f: UV, or equivalently, 
P (V|U)
, we use the training data to learn estimates of 
P (U|V)
 and 
P (V).
 Using these 
estimated probability distributions and Bayes rule
14 new 
U examples can then be classi
ed.  From  a  given  set  of  training  instances with class labels, a
 learner  in  classification  learning  problems,  
attempts  to construct  a  classifier. The Naive Bayes 
classi
er assumes all attributes describing 
U are conditionally 
independent given 
V. The number of parameters that must be estimated to learn the classi
er is reduced dramatically 
by this assumption
. For both discrete and continuous 
U14, Naive Bayes is a widely used learning algorithm
. 5.3.
 Weka
 The Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (Weka)  is a  machine  learning  toolkit
 used extensively for 
research, education and projects. Weka is
 introduced by Waikato University, New Zealand and
 is open source 
software written in Java (GNU Public License). It consists of collection of machine learning algorithms and tools for 
data mining tasks such as data pre
-processing or data preparation, classification, association rules, clustering, 
regression, forecasting and visualization and is well suited for developing new machine learning schemes
16. Weka 
3.7.4 is used for experimentation in our work and can be run on Linux, Windows and Mac.  
 729 T. Femina Bahari and M. Sudheep Elayidom  /  Procedia Computer Science   46  ( 2015 )  725  731 
6. Implementation Logic 
 6.1.
 Data Preprocessing
 Originally the dataset contained 79354 contacts and 58 attributes. Contacts with missing data or inconclusive 
results were discarded leading to 45211 instances and 17 attributes without missing values. Attributes relevant to 
contact information was obtained from the campaign reports whereas attributes relevant to clients were collected 
from the banks internal database. The output attribute is whether the client subscribes the bank term deposit or not. 

Out of 58 attributes there were several irrelevant attributes that adversely affects the data mining learning process. A 

manual feature selection procedure with the help of Rattle analysis was used to reduce the attributes to 29 input 
attributes and 1 output attribute. This was further reduced in various CRISP
-DM iterations and finally 17 attributes 
including the output attribute were selected for the test data
11. Only 10% of the instances (4521) available in the 
dataset were used for the experimental studies.
 6.2.
 Modeling
 All e
xperiments were performed using weka tool and were conducted in windows 7 with Intel Core i3 2.53 GHz 
processor. In this work, we build two distinct DM classifier models: MLPNN and NB. For all the two models test 
mode of tenfold cross validation was used. ML
PNN uses back propagation to classify the instances. The nodes are 
all sigmoid except
 for when the class is numeric. We set the number of hidden layers using the heuristic 
a=round 
(M/2)
 where 
M is the sum of attributes and classes. Other network parameters were set as follows: learning rate 0.3, 
momentum 0.2, training time 500ms and validation threshold 20. During the modeling phase we successfully tested 
the two models, MLPNN and NB using the weka tool. 
10-fold cross validation
 was used to perform our 
experiments. 
Ten disjoint subsets
 were created by partitioning the original dataset 
randomly. Nine of the subsets  
were  combined  to  form  the  training  set  and  the remaining  subset  forms  the  testing  set in each of the ten runs. 
Based on the response, two classes were obtained, those which responded positive and those responded negative. 
 7. Test Result
 The results of our experiment for automatically classifying a given dataset are summarized in
 Table 1.
 which 
shows values for two different classifiers. For each method the classification accuracy (amount of correctly 
classified instances), true positive rate
 (the proportion of actual positives which are correctly identified as such)
, false positive rate (incorrectly classified positive), ROC area (area under the ROC curve) and the time taken to build 
the classifier model is shown. 
 Table 1
. Results of comparison of classifiers, average over 10 runs.
 Classifier
 Classification Accuracy(%)
 True Positive 
Rate(TPR)
 False Positive 
Rate(FPR)
 ROC Area
 Time taken to 
build models (s)
 MLPNN
 88.63
 0.41
 0.052
 0.847
 1767.75
 NB 87.97
 0.47
 0.067
 0.858
 0.08
  MLPNN classifier model shows better accuracy (88.63%) among the two models experimented. NB gives better 
values of TPR
 (0.47)
, FPR
 (0.067) 
and ROC area
 (0.
858). The time taken to build the model is very high for 
MLPNN (1767.75s)
.  In our work three statistical measures namely classification accuracy, sensitivity and specificity
 are used to 
evaluate the performance of the
 classification model
s. This information is given in terms of instances classified as 
true positive (TP), true negative (TN), false positive (FP) and false negative (FN
)6. This information about actual 
and predicted classification defines a confusion matrix and is given in Table
 2. 
 730   T. Femina Bahari and M. Sudheep Elayidom  /  Procedia Computer Science   46  ( 2015 )  725  731 
Table 
2. Confusion Matrix for each classifier
. Classifier
 Confusion Matrix
 a                
b   Classified as
 MLPNN
 213           308 
 206           3794
 a = yes b = no
 NB 246           275
 269          3731
 a = yes b = no
  Classification accuracy as shown in equation (3) is equal to the sum of TP and TN divided by the total number of 
cases N
5 and it refers to the ratio of the number of correctly classified cases.
  Accuracy   =      TP+TN                                                                                                        
                                  
(3) 
  N   
                 
 Sensitivity
 in equation (4) is equal to ratio
 of TP to the sum of TP and FN and it refers to the rate of correctly 
classified positive (True Positive Rate).
  Sensitivity =       TP                                                                                                         
                                        
(4)
                        TP+FN
  Specificity in equation (5) is equal to TN divided
 by sum of TN and FP
6 and it refers to the rate of correctly 
classified negative (True Negative Rate).
  Specificity =        TN                                                                                                           
                                     
(5)
                          TN+FP
  MLPNN model shows the best values for accuracy (88.63%) and specificity (94.85%) for the training samples 
where as NB gives the best value for sensitivity (47.2%). The performance of the three classifiers is compared in 
terms of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity and 
 the results of the compariso
n are as shown in Table 3
. Table 
3. Performance comparison of classifiers in terms of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity
 Classifier
 Accuracy(%)
 Sensitivity(%)
 Specificity(%)
 MLPNN
 88.63
 40.9
 94.85
 NB 87.97
 47.2
 93.28
  Out of the 4521 instances in the
 dataset, the instances classified correctly and instances classified
 incorrectly for 
each model are
 as shown in Table 4. MLPNN c
lassified 4007 
instances correctly wher
eas NB classified 3977 
instances correctly.
 Table 4. Classification of 4521 instances in
 the dataset.
 Classifier
 Correctly classified instances
 Incorrectly classified instances
 MLPNN
 4007 514 NB 3977 544 8. Conclusion and Future Scope
 In this paper we propose an efficient CRM
-data mining framework for the prediction of customer behaviour. 
Two classification models were used to predict the customer behaviour. In order to arrive at authentic research 
731 T. Femina Bahari and M. Sudheep Elayidom  /  Procedia Computer Science   46  ( 2015 )  725  731 
results it is always better to use standard bench marking datasets like UCI datasets. Hence we used the same in this 
work. The best model that achieves high predictive performance was MLPNN with accuracy rate of 88.63%. We 

also compared the performance of classifiers in terms of accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. This work can be 
extended to other new models like Neuro fuzzy classifiers, Ensemble
 of classifiers and so
 on. Also the same 
experimental set up can be applied to other huge live banking datasets.
 References
 1. Berson 
 A, Smith S, Thearling K. Building data mining applications for CRM,
 McGraw
-Hill; 2000.
 2. Cortez P.
 Data  Mining  with  Neural  Networks  and Support  Vector  Machines  using  the  R/rminer  Tool,  
In Proceedings  of  the  10th
  Industrial  Conference  on  Data Mining
, Germany: Springer; 2010. p. 572
583. 3. EWT Ngai. Customer relationship management research (1992
2002): An
 academic literature review and classi
cation, 
Marketing 
Intelligence, Pl
anning;  
23, 2005.  p. 582
605. 4. EWT Ngai, L Xiu, DCK.Chau.
 Application of Data Mining Techniques in Customer Relationship Management: A Literature Review on 
Classification, 
Expert Systems with Applications; 
36- 2, 2009.  p. 2592
-2602. 5. Hany AE.  Bank Direct Marketing Analysis of Data Mining Techniques, 
International Journal of Computer Applications;  
85-7, 2014.
 6. JW Han  M Kamber.
 Data mining  concepts  and techniques,  2nd  ed.
 Morgan  Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA;
 2006. 7. Ling, R., Yen D. Customer relationship management: An analysis framework and implementation strategies, 
Journal of Computer Information
 Systems
; 41, 2001.  p. 82
97. 8. Mi
 tra  S, Pal
 SK, Mitra 
 P. Data mining
 in soft computing framework: A survey, 
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
; 13, 2002. p.
 314. 9. MJA Berry, G
S Linoff, Data  Mining Techniques: For  marketing, Sales  and Customer Relationship  Management,
 Indianapolis: Wiley; 2004.
 10. S Moro, P Cortez, P
 Rita
. A data
-driven approach to predict the success of bank telemarketing, 
Decision Support Systems; 
62, 2014. p. 23
-31. 11. S Moro, R Laureano, P Cortez. Using Data Mining for Bank Direct Marketing: An Application of the CRISP
-DM Methodology,             
         
Proceedings of the European Simulation and Mode
lling Conference
; Portugal, 2011 . p. 117
-121. 12. Swift RS. Accelerating customer relationships: Using CRM and relationship technologies, N.J: Prentice Hall PTR;
 2001 13. T
 Munkata. Fundamentals 
 of  new  artificial intelligence, 2nd  ed. London: Springer
-Verlag;
 2008. 14. Tom M Mitchell. Machine Learning, 2nd  ed. McGraw Hill; 2010.
 15. Turban E, Aronson JE, Liang TP,
 Sharda 
 R. Decision support and business intelligence systems,
 8th 
ed.Pearson Education; 2007
. 16. Witten I, Frank
 E. Data Mining 
 Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 2nd ed. USA: Elsevier;
 2005.       
   
   