Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
2212-8271  2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
).Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 9th CIRP IPSS Conference: Circular Perspectives on Product/Service-Systems.
doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2017.03.131 
 Procedia CIRP   64  ( 2017 )  306  311 
ScienceDirect
The 9th CIRP IPSS Conference: Circular Perspectives on Product/Service-Systems Data Mining in Product Service Systems Design: Literature Review and Research Questions  Alessandro Bertoni*, Tobias Larsson  Blekinge Institute of Technology, Campus Grsvik, 37179 Karlskrona, Sweden 
 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +46 455 38 55 02. E-mail address: alessandro.bertoni@bth.se Abstract The paper presents a literature review about data mining appli
cations in Product/Service-Systems (PSS) design. A systematic lit
erature review, combined with snowballing techniques, has been run to identify re
levant contributions in the area. The analysis has focused on the categorization of the contributions according to their impact on the PSS design process and according to their theoretical or e
mpirical nature. A 
picture of the different research achievements for each stage of the PSS design process have been drawn, identifying the research gaps in respect to the challenges of PSS design. Based on the analysis the paper proposes a set of research questions for each PSS design stage with the 
intent of facilitating the application of data mining techniques 
in PSS design, and ultimately push forward the state of the ar
t.   2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 9th CIRP IPSS Conference: Circular Perspectives on Product/
Service-
Systems.  Keywords: Product service systems design; data mining; research questions; literature review.  1. Introduction Information and communication technologies have revolutionised lifestyles, global interaction and industrial 

working practices. Companies are nowadays potentially 

capable of collecting data about any product lifecycle activity 
and performance. Devices and sensors may become smart 
and are used in a variety of contexts: from monitoring the performances of machines, to predict failures and run 
preventive maintenance, to provide driving assistance and to 
manage a whole fleet of vehicles based on GPS (see for 

instance [1-3]). The use of data mining in combination with 
the development of IT infrastructures and with increased data storage capabilities, has propelled a profound shift toward 

more transparent, informed and autonomous decision-making [4]. However, while companies are often in the situation of 

being capable of collecting a huge amount of data, their use is 
often limited to maintenance and management purposes; more 
rarely those data become useful knowledge and insights in the 
design phase of a new products or services. A challenge is given by the multi-dimensional and multidisciplinary nature of 

the design process, generating a large amount of 
heterogeneous data for which suitable mining methods are not 

readily available [5], accentuated by a generic lack of context 
around the situation where data is collected. In the 
development of products and services combinations, i.e. 
product/service-systems (PSS), a formalized approach on how to use data to develop new and more value adding solutions is 

missing. This is due to the relative novelty of both the PSS 
design field and of the data mining field, which have developed with different focuses requiring different expertise.   The research presented in this paper has the purpose to explore the potential that resides in the integration of data 
mining techniques into methods and tools for PSS design. The 
aim of the paper is therefore to investigate, and review, the 
theoretical and empirical applications of data mining in PSS design literature, by:  Mapping and analyzing the curre
nt contributions into the PSS design process.   2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
).Peer-review under responsibility of the scienti c committee of the 9th CIRP IPSS Conference: Circular Perspectives on Product/Service-Systems.
307 Alessandro Bertoni and Tobias Larsson  /  Procedia CIRP   64  ( 2017 )  306  311 
 Highlighting a list of research questions to be addressed to 
enable a wider application of data mining into PSS design. The paper first describes the methodology applied in the literature review by briefly presenting the PSS design process 
used as a reference for the analysis. In section 3 the literature review and the analysis are presented together with a number of identified research questions. Section 4 closes the paper by 
drawing the final conclusions. 2. Methodology 
The research was initially a
pproached through a literature search run on a major research database (i.e. Scopus1). The scope of the search was deliberately limited to those papers presenting the use of data mining techniques referring to the 
design of PSS or to the conjunct design of products and 
services. The concept of machine learning, although not 

synonym of data mining (as explain in section 3) was also included in the research, to assure the completeness of the 

results. In a first step a systematic research for papers was performed. The search was directed toward titles, abstracts or 

keywords containing the term product service systems in combination with either data 
mining machine learning or data science. This first round of analysis led to the 
identification of only 13 unique papers. Due to such limited 
number of publications the literature base was expanded by 

applying a snowballing technique [6] on the initial set of 

papers. The reference list of each of the paper was screened 
for relevant contributions and 21 papers were selected for 

detailed analysis at the end of the process.  Those papers were later analyzed by classifying their content and contribution in relation to the PSS design process. To define the categories for analysis the Generic IPSS/PSS 

development process model by Mller and Stark [7] was 

adopted as reference. The model is V-shaped and 
encompasses 4 levels of detail: market/customer/environment 

level, value level, system level, module and component level. For each level, different activities take place involving 
different stakeholders. The following five main activities have 

been identified in accordance to the model and have been 
used to provide a first classification of the literature:  Planning  Idea generation   Embodiment design for subsystem 
 Detailed design  Delivery and use phase  The papers were further categorized by adding a distinction between those describing a framework or a conceptual 
method and those providing examples of real case study applications. The classification was run in a way that each 
paper could be assigned only to one category. The 
discriminant for the selection was the main contribution of   1 www.scopus.com the paper, evaluated based on the content and on the 
terminology stressed by the authors in the conclusion 
section of the papers.  The analysis of the literature and the research questions derived are the result of an analytical process applied to a 
critical literature review (similarly to what described by 

Jessons and Lacey [8]). The theoretical contributions were 
analyzed in respect with the available examples in applied 
research. This has allowed the production of a general 

framework of analysis in consideration of the main issues and 

challenges recognized in literature for the design of PSS, 
encompassing weak and sweets spots of the main PSS design 

methods and tools. Upon this basis, the direct impact on 
applied practice was the driving criterion for the definition of 

the questions, with a focus on the empirical benefits of 
developing more advanced method and tools for PSS design. 3. Data mining in PSS design: contributions and research 
questions Data mining is defined as the discovery of non-trivial, 
implicit, previously unknown, and potentially useful and understandable patterns from large datasets [9]. When it 
comes to application of data mining in industrial 
environments, the term is often associated with the concept of 

machine learning, i.e. the study 
of computer algorithms that improve automatically through experience [10]. Data mining 
and machine learning are used in engineering both with the predictive goal of forecasting the value of a variable and with 
the descriptive goal of understanding and discovering patterns 
in the available data [9]. The following sub-sections provide 

an account of the application of data mining and machine 
learning available in literature highlighting applications 
explicitly referring to the context of PSS design. 
3.1. Summary of state-of-the-art and paper categorization The papers identified in the literature review have been 
first categorized based on if their main contribution in respect to the PSS design process, and then based on the type of 
academic contribution, that is, if the paper presented a 
conceptual framework or method, or if it concerned the 
presentation of a real case implementation of an approach. A further distinction was made based on the terminology used 

when referring to the design of product and service 
combinations, i.e., the papers e
xplicitly referring to PSS in the 
text, and the papers not directly using the PSS terminology 
even if dealing with relevant t
opics for the investigation. The 
reason for doing this last classification was to verify the 

popularity of the data mining topic in the major publication arena for PSS research. The results of the classification are visualized in Figure 1. The numbers in the white circles indicate the number of 

publications for each category directly or indirectly related to 
the development of PSS, the numbers in the grey circles indicate instead the number of those publications explicitly 

referring to a PSS terminology. 
 308   Alessandro Bertoni and Tobias Larsson  /  Procedia CIRP   64  ( 2017 )  306  311 
309 Alessandro Bertoni and Tobias Larsson  /  Procedia CIRP   64  ( 2017 )  306  311 
310   Alessandro Bertoni and Tobias Larsson  /  Procedia CIRP   64  ( 2017 )  306  311 
311 Alessandro Bertoni and Tobias Larsson  /  Procedia CIRP   64  ( 2017 )  306  311 
