Avoidance of Power Draining in Mobile Ad-HOC Network over Vampire Attack Anam
ika Garg
#1, Mayank K Sharma
#2 PG scholar, Department of CSE, RGPV University 
Asst. Professor, Department of CSE, RGPV University 
Abstract 
MANET stands for Mobile ad hoc network which is 
independent of any fixed infrastructure or centralized 
administration. In exacting, a MANET has no base stations: a 
node communicates directly with nodes within wireless range 

and indirectly with all other nodes using a dynamically-
computed, multi-hop route via the other nodes of the MANET 
For the communication purpose every node contain certain 
energy and used this energy for the communication. This work 
presents a model for evaluating the energy consumption 
behavior of a mobile ad hoc network in the presence of 
vampire attack which is energy draining attack. For the 

simulation NS2.35 used having energy model. For the 
detection and prevention Intrusion Detection technique used 
which is based on the highest energy level of the node. 
Detection technique consider node to be malicious if node 
contains highest energy level of the other nodes.   
Keywords MANET, Denial of Service, Security, Routing, Ad-
Hoc Networks, Sensor Networks, Wireless Networks.
 I. INTRODUCTION
 Mobile ad-hoc Networks is one of growing technology in 
wireless networks field. It may be defined as temporarily or 
infrastructure less topology based collection of autonomous 
nodes. Mobile nodes have self-manageable characteristic 

which help to establish and communicate automatically. 
Furthermore, Dynamic topology na
ture gives facility to join 
or leave network any time. 
 Mobile nodes are collection of
 battery, processor, memory 
storage and suit of transducer. Here, battery may be 
chargeable or fixed nature depends requirement and node 

type. Subsequently, life of node is directly proportional 
with capacity of battery. Degradation in battery leads to 
degradation in node life. The complete phenomena impact 

on overall network performance and degrade the packet 
delivery accordingly. 
 Communication among nodes depends on transmission 
range of mobile node. A wide range communication 
expects intermediate node or router to discover and transfer 
the packet. Here, each mobile node is capable to work as 

node or router or switch. Therefore, it does not require any 
external device to connect mobile nodes or mobile 
networks. 
 Due to wide range applications require distant 

communication and route discovery on intermediate nodes. 

The nodes discover multi-hop 
routes to each other by 
exchanging topology information in the form of control 

messages. Ad-hoc networks are suitable for areas where it 

is not possible to set up a fixed infrastructure such as 
military, transport, aviation and commercial. Since the 
nodes communicate with each other without an 
infrastructure, they provide the connectivity by forwarding 

packets over themselves.
 Routing protocols are used to discover routes from source 

to destination. It may be classified into two category; 

Proactive Routing Protocol or Reactive Routing Protocols. 
Proactive routing protocols discover routes before their 
demand. Where, Reactive routing protocols are on-demand 

routing protocols. Here, reactiv
e routing protocols are more 
suitable for mobile ad-hoc networks due to their on-demand 

route discovery nature. 
 The complete phenomena require lots of energy for route 
discovery and packet transmission. A heavy route discovery 
process or information processing will quickly degrade the 

battery capacity. The complete work observes that, energy 
consumption is the key challenge in mobile ad-hoc 
networks and it should be as possible as least amount.  
 II.RELETED WORKEnergy conservation is an important issue in ad hoc 
networks as nodes are usually battery powered. Even 
though a node may not have any message of its own to 
transmit, its battery is drained when it acts as a router and 
forwards packets for other nodes. In transmit mode a 
mobile unit uses its maximum power level to transfer 
packet to another node. Communication involves the cost of 
sending data along with control packet from source, routed 
through intermediate node and cost at receiving at 
destination end.
 To understand the concept and impact of power draining on 
MANET, work consider certain research work which is 
explain below:
 Zubair A. Baiget. al[1] pr
oposed a solution where it 

concludes that Distributed Denial of Service attack is most 

popular attack for power drai
ning. They also discussed 
about various attack models and impact. They designed 

pattern recognition problem to detect DDOS attack. 

Proposed method improves performance on basis of timely 
and energy-efficient manner. 
 S. N. Premnathet. al. [3] pro
posed a advanced DDOS attack 
They also propose a special 
attack named as SDP Attack 
(Service Discovery Protocol based attack) to make Heavy 
Power Drain on node.SDP sends new service request 

similar to SYN Flooding to create conjunction and 
overwhelming the nodes. SDP attack effectively make it 
inoperable and reducing the battery life by as much as 97%. 
 Ambili M. A, BijuBalakrishnan [4] proposed energy 
draining in WSN and introduced 
energy Based Intrusion 
Detection System. Intrusion Detection method detect 
vampire node on the basis of energy level of the node. All 
nodes that present in the network will have same energy 
level and during the communication little changes will take 
place. Intrusion Detection based on the fact that the 
melicious node will have more power than other node 
because it will consumes othe
r nodes energy so it will ave 
high energy level. Thus all nodes energy level measured 
and the node which have abnormally high energy, 
considered as vampire node. 
 Chahana B. Thakur ,V.B.Vaghela [5] describe vampire 
attack and its types and introduced flag based technique to 

detect and prevent vampire attack
. Flag set to header to it 
cannot take much space and can
 prevent from the repeated 
path as for the carousel attack. 
 III.
 SECURITY
 THREATS
 Security threats come when ba
sic security breaks down and 
this can be any form like ener
gy based security threats. 
 Attacks are classified into two categories:
  Active Attack
  Passive Attack DOS attack is considered to be active attacks which prevent 

the normal use of communication services.
 DOS attacks in wireless network not only cause damage to 
the victim node but decrease the performance of the entire 
network because nodes have a limited battery power and the 
network can be congested due to limited bandwidth.  
 Some recognized attacks are as follows:
 A. Black Hole Attack 
In this attack malicious node drops the entire packet 
transmitted by the sender.
 B. Gray Hole Attack
 Grey Hole attack is similar to 
black hole attack except that 
the malicious node drops selective packets not all the 
packets are dropped.
 C. Worm Hole Attack
 In this attack two malicious nodes participates for 

establishing the tunnel. One node takes the data packet from 
the sender and sends to the other participant (malicious 
node). In this way two malicious node creates tunnel.
 D. Sybil Attack
 In this attack one malicious nodes recognize the network 

and acquires multiple fake identities and pretends to be 

multiple, distinct nodes in the system. 
 E. Vampire Attack
 It is energy darning attack where malicious node consumes 

other nodes energy and downs all the nodes energy.
  Mobile ad-hoc network particular vulnerable to DoS attack. 
Attacks can be of two types, a resource depletion attack and 
a routing disruption attack. [5] A routing disruption attack 
tries to alter the routing path e.g.: Worm hole, Sybil attack, 

etc. whereas the resource depl
etion attack only focuses on 
the battery power and memory
. The most permanent DoS 
attack is to entirely deplete nodes' batteries. 
  This is an instance of a resour
ce depletion attack, with the 
battery power as the resource 
of interest. These attacks are 
commonly called as Vampire attacks. 
 IV. VAMIRE
 ATTACK
 Vampire attack is energy draining attack where messages 

send by the malicious node which causes more energy 
consumption. This energy consumption is very high and 

leading to slow depletion of network nodes battery life.
 [2] Vampire attacks are not protocol-specific, in that they 

do not rely on design properties or implementation faults of 

particular routing protocols, but rather exploit general 
properties of protocol classes 
such as link-state, distance 
vector, source routing and geographic and beacon routing. 
Neither do these attacks rely on flooding the network with 
large amounts of data, but rather try to transmit as little data 
as possible to achieve the larg
est energy drain, so it takes 
large energy to transmit the data and consumes the node 

energy. Since Vampires use protocol-compliant messages, 

these attacks are very diffic
ult to detect and prevent.
 The vampire attacks can be cla
ssified has two types. There 
are: one is Carousel attack 
and other is Stretch attack.
 1)  
Carousel Attack In the Carousel attack, [4] at
tackers introduce some packet 

within a route as a sequence of loops, such that the same 

node appears in the route of
 communication many times. 
This attack increases the routing length and delay very 

much in the net- works and also inadequate by the number 

of allowable entries in the resource route. 
 Series of loops made in this way, such that the same node 

appears in the route many times. [3] This strategy can be 

used to increase the route length beyond the number of 
nodes in the network, only limited by the number of 
allowed entries in the source route.
 Route looping causes high energy consumption which 
drains energy level of the whole network. 
    
 
   
 
 
     Source                                               Destination
 Honest Path 1-2-3-4-5-6
 Carousel Attack Introduce path 1-2-3-4-5-4-3-2-3-4-5-6
 Introduce Loop between 2-3-4-5 
 Fig. Example of Carousel Attack 
 2)  Stretch Attack 
Second attack also [4] targe
ting resource steering, attackers 
construct falsely long routes, 
potentially traversing every 
node in the network. And al
so stretch attack, increases 
packet length, causing packets to be processed by a number 
123456of nodes that is self-governing of hop count down the 
straight path stuck between the 
challenger and packet target.
 For this type of attack malicious node constructs artificially 

long source routes, causing pack
ets to traverse a larger than 
optimal number of nodes. [3] The honest path is very less 
distant but the malicious path is very long to make more 
energy consumption.
      
   
   
   
Source                               Destination 
Honest Path 1-2-3-4-5-6
 Stretch Attack Introduce path 1-2-3-4-7-8--9-5-6
 Fig. Example of Stretch Attack
  Impact of Vampire Attack
 Ad-hoc network communication based on the nodes energy 

level. Vampire attack based on the poser draining of 

network. Presence of vampire attack leads to the failure of 
the node and the network also due to the energy 
consumption of nodes. Data loss will also occur.  
 V. SIMULATION TOOL Work done performed with the help of ns2.35 network 

simulator. This software is a discrete event driven simulator 
and is developed at UC Berkelry as a part if the VINT 
project. It is distributed as open source software. 
 NS2 is built using object oriented language C++ and OTcl 
(Object oriented varient of Tool Command Language). NS-
2 interprets the simulation scripts written in Otcl. User 

writes his simulation as an Otcl script. Some parts of NS2 
are written in C++ for efficiency reason. It also use various 
tools like Nam which is Network animator to visualize the 

running network scenario. Xgraph tool for plotting the 
graph for result analysis. 
 VI. PERFORMANCE
 METRICS
 In order to evaluate the performance, several metrics are 
used, such as packet delivery fraction, end-to-end delay, 

throughput, and power consumption. The most important 
metrics for best-effort traf
fic are the packet delivery 
fraction and the end-to-end delay. However, these metrics 
are not entirely independent as a shorter delay does not 
necessarily mean a higher packet
 delivery fraction, as only 
successfully delivered packet
s are used to measure the 
delay. A lower packet delivery fraction and longer delay 

may, however, cause a larger overhead. 
 F. A. Packet Delivery Fraction 
The ratio of the number of data packets sent by the CBR 

sources and the number of da
ta packets received by the 
CBR sinks at their destination. It shows how reliable a 
protocol is and the higher the PDF, the better the results. 
 G. B. End-to-end Delay 
The average length of time, measured in seconds, necessary 

to deliver a set of data from the source to the destination 
node. 
 It includes all potential delays resulting from queuing at the 
interface queue, propagation and transfer times, and 
retransmission delays at the MAC layer. 
 H. C. Throughput 
The number of bytes successfully transferred to the 

destination during a specific amount of time (s). 
 I. D. Power Consumption 
The average power consumption per node is calculated 
based on the ratio of the total energy consumed by all nodes 

in the network divided by the total number of nodes. 
 TABLE
 I SIMULATION
 PARAMETER 
Channel Channel/WirelessChannel Propagation Propagation/TwoRayGround
 Network Interface Phy/WirelessPhy
 Platform
 Ubuntu 13.10 / 15.04 NS Version Ns-allinone-2.35 MAC Mac/802_11 Interface Queue
 Queue/ DropTail / PriQueue
 Link Layer LL Antenna Antenna/OmniAntenna
 Interface Queue 
Length 50 No. of Nodes
 20 Simulation area size
 750*750 Traffic Pattern
 CBR Sessions
 CBR Packet Size
 512 bytes Simulation Duration 130 seconds  TABLE
 IIIII 
PERFORMANCE
 EVALUATION 
 VII.
 CONCLUSION
 This paper introduces energy draining attack and the 

proposed method to detect and remove it by using intrusion 
detection method. Intrusion detection method detect 
malicious node on the basis of energy level of nodes and 

remove that node from the current path. Thus the securing 
of network nodes energy is carried out and finding alternate 
path for route after detection is done. The simulation result 

proves the improvement in the energy consumed and 
throughput and decreases hop count and save the nodes 
energy. By avoiding vampire attack this work will increase 

life of the node and the network. It will be very crucial in 
  Normal AODV 
AODV with Vampire Attack 
Modified AODV 
Throughput(b/s) 
84.78 25.29 52.72 Total Energy 
200.813 259.39 215 Protocol Energy 
50.203 64.849 53.813 312478956REFERENCES [1]  Getsy S Sara1, S.NeelavathyPari, D. Sridharan,EVALUATION 
AND COMPARISON OF EMERGING ENERGY EFFICIENT 
ROUTINGPROTOCOLS IN MANET 
in proceedings published in 
ICTACT JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY, 
MARCH 2010.
 [2]  V.Sharmila1, Mr. K. MuthuRamalingam Energy Depletion Attacks: 
Detecting and Blocking in Wireless 
Sensor Network IJCSMC, Vol. 
3, Issue. 8, August 2014
 [3]  P.Suthahar, IIR.Bharathinternational Defending against Energy 
Draining attack in Wireless Ad-Hoc Sensor Networks  Journal of 

Advanced Research in Computer Science & Technology (IJARCST 

2014) Vol. 2 Issue Special 1 Jan-March 2014.
 [4] Ambili M. A, BijuBalakrishnan Vampire Attack : Detection and 
Elimination in Wsn.
 [5]  ChahanaB. Thakur ,V.B.Vaghe
la Detection and Elimination of 
Vampire Attack in Mobile Ad hoc Network INDIAN JOURNAL 
OF APPLIED RESEARCH Volume - 5 | Issue - 1 | Jan Special Issue 
- 2015 | ISSN - 2249-555X
 [6]  Eugene Y. Vasserman , Nicholas
 Hopper, Vampire attacks: Draining 
life from wireless ad-hoc sensor networks.2011.
 [7]  ImadAad, Jean- Pierre Hubaux, 
and Edward W.Knightly, Denail of 
service resilience in ad hoc networks, mobicom,2004 
 
 
   
      
   
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
    