DOI:10.1046/j.1365-
2125.2003.01968.x
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology
 2003 Blackwell Publishing LtdBr J Clin Pharmacol57:2127134127
Blackwell Science, LtdOxford, UKBCP
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology0306-5251Blackwell Publishing 2003? 2003572127134Review Article
Data mining in pharmacovigilanceA. M. Wilson 
et al.CorrespondenceDr Anne E Holbrook, Director, Centre 

for Evaluation of Medicine, 105 Main 

Street East, Level P1, Hamilton, 
Ontario L8N 1G6, Canada.Keywordsadverse drug events, data mining, knowledge discovery in databases, 
pharmacovigilance 
Received24 April 2003
Accepted

28 July 2003
Application of data mining techniques in pharmacovigilance
Andrew M. Wilson,
1,2 Lehana Thabane
2,3 & Anne Holbrook1,2,31Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, 
2Centre for Evaluation of Medicines and 
3Department of Clinical Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, McMaster University, 105 Main Street East, Level P1, Hamilton, ON L8N 1G6, Canada
AimsTo discuss the potential use of data mining and knowledge discovery in databasesfor detection of adverse drug events (ADE) in pharmacovigilance.
MethodsA literature search was conducted to identify articles, which contained details of data

mining, signal generation or knowledge discovery in relation to adverse drug reactions
or pharmacovigilance in medical databases.
ResultsADEs are common and result in signicant mortality, and despite existing systems

drugs have been withdrawn due to ADEs many years after licensing. Knowledge
discovery in databases (KDD) is a technique which may be used to detect potential
ADEs more efciently. KDD involves the selection of data variables and databases,

data preprocessing, data mining and data interpretation and utilization. Data mining
encompasses a number of statistical techniques including cluster analysis, link anal-
ysis, deviation detection and disproportionality assessment which can be utilized to

determine the presence of and to assess the strength of ADE signals. Currently the

only data mining methods to be used in pharmacovigilance are those of dispropor-

tionality, such as the Proportional Reporting Ratio and Information Component, which

have been used to analyse the UK Yellow Card Scheme spontaneous reporting

database and the WHO Uppsala Monitoring Centre database. The association of

pericarditis with practolol but not with other b-blockers, the association of captopriland other angiotensin-converting enzymes with cough, and the association of ter-

fenadine with heart rate and rhythm disorders could be identied by mining the WHO

database.ConclusionIn view of the importance of ADEs and the development of massive data storage

systems and powerful computer systems, the use of data mining techniques in

knowledge discovery in medical databases is likely to be of increasing importance in
the process of pharmacovigilance as they are likely to be able to detect signals earlier
than using current methods.IntroductionAdverse drug events (ADEs) constitute a major public
health problem. They are estimated to account for up to

5% of hospital admissions [1], 28% of all emergency
department visits [2], and 5% of hospital deaths [3].Many ADEs, such as prescription errors, are preventable

[4], and methods have been suggested to reduce these

errors [5, 6]. However other ADEs are unknown at the
A. M. Wilson et al.
12857:2Br J Clin Pharmacoltime of marketing as premarketing studies are generally
small, of a short duration, do not detect late-onset or rare
adverse effects and, by excluding patients with comor-

bid disease, have limited generalizability. For example

the interaction between terfenadine and cytochromal

p450 enzyme inhibitors causing cardiac arrhythmias

was only recognized 7 years after licensing [7]. Further-
more, clinical trials typically underplay harm in their
reporting [8]. For example, increased risks of serious

cardiac events with rofecoxib were suggested by a

further analysis [9] of the VIGOR study [10], which

occurred a year after the marketing of this therapy.
In the current regulatory environment, where efca-
cious drugs are brought to market as soon as possible

[11], post-marketing drug surveillance (PMS) has

become increasingly important in order to characterize
cost-effectiveness and harm in real practice. Recent

examples of drug withdrawals, due to uncommon ADEs
after millions of patients were exposed [12], have rein-

forced the inadequacy of current methods of PMS.
Over recent years, with the development of large
electronic health data storage systems, powerful com-

puters and new statistical algorithms, there has been an

increased interest in data mining or knowledge discov-

ery initiatives from databases. These processes, which

were mainly used in the marketing industry, have gained

popularity in various elds such as web mining [13] and

information science [14, 15] but very little information

exists on their application in pharmacovigilance [16].
The purpose of this paper is to review the current use of

data mining in pharmacovigilance and provide an over-

view of the data mining process.
MethodsAn electronic search of MEDLINE from 1966 to 2002
identied articles which contained the keywords data-

mining, data mining, signal generation, exploratory

methods, exploratory tools, neural network, dispropor-

tionality, signal detection, higher than expected combi-

nation, signal, data interrogation, database interrogation,

Bayesian, cluster analysis, hypothesis generation,

knowledge discovery, symmetrical analysis, prescrip-

tion event monitoring and adverse drug effect, adverse

drug event, pharmacovigilance, drug side-effect, toxi-

cology, electronic medical records, EMR, large admin-

istrative data, linked administrative data, Medicaid,

MEMO, GPRD, Tayside, Saskatchewan, Unitedhealth

Group, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care. This search

resulted in 340 citations, the title and abstract of which
were reviewed. Sixty-four articles in the English lan-

guage were identied, of which 39 manuscripts were
considered relevant and reviewed. The relevant articles
will be discussed within the context of the data mining
process.What is data mining?There is some confusion in the terminology of datamining. Some authors refer to data mining as the process
of acquiring information, whereas others refer to data
mining as utilization of statistical techniques within the
knowledge discovery process. We will dene knowledge

discovery in databases (KDD) as the process of extract-

ing previously unknown, valid and actionable informa-

tion from large information sources or databases. The

process requires a denition of the project goals, dataset
acquisition, data cleaning and preprocessing, data min-
ing, data interpretation and utilization [17]. We will

dene data mining as the application of statistical
techniques, e.g. predictive modelling, clustering, link

analysis, deviation detection and disproportionality

measures, to databases. All of the above KDD steps are

required when embarking on a project from the begin-

ning. However, some researchers take a given database

and perform statistical analysis in order to mine it for

additional unrecognized information and therefore call
the process data mining.Many of the statistical techniques used in data mining
are the same as conventional methods of examining

data. However, their use within KDD differs in that there

is no prior hypothesis or null hypothesis, and power

calculations are not performed. For this reason, if no

signal is produced at the end of the analysis it is not
possible to tell whether this is because the signal does
not exist or because insufcient data are being analysed.

Essentially, once the aims have been dened and the

database is prepared for data mining, the statistical tech-
niques attempt to nd patterns, or associations or dis-
similarities between groups of data in order to generate
a signal or detect new information.
Steps of knowledge discovery in databases (Table 1)
Identication of objectives/goalsAlthough there is no detailed a priori hypothesis inKDD, and one should keep an open mind when explor-

ing for possible ADEs [18], it is important to have

an aim, as KDD is costly in terms of data collection and

management.Selection of variablesA clearly dened aim makes it easier to determine the

type of variables and data mining technique to be used.

For example, assessing drug-related birth defects would
require a different data set than drugdrug interactions.
Data mining in pharmacovigilance
Br J Clin Pharmacol57:2129
However, in order to maximize the chance of detecting
a signal, the most inclusive collection of relevant vari-

ables should be used. The World Health Organization

(WHO) Adverse Reaction Terminology and Medical

Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) are

examples of datasets used for pharmacovigilance [19],
but their list of variables is limited to those determined
by prior assessments of causation [20]. In terms of vari-

able availability, electronic medical records (see below)

hold potential in being the repository of the widest pos-
sible medical terminology. For example, new medical

conditions, such as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome,

will be used within electronic medical records before
they are incorporated into adverse reaction terminology

dictionaries.Selection of data sources/databasesAs data collection is expensive, data mining processes

are often performed on existing databases, for the pur-

poses of pharmacovigilance. The necessary size of the

dataset required is difcult to determine but will depend

on the data quality, the background frequency of the

event and the strength of the association of the event
with the drug. However, for even moderately rare events,

large databases are required. The characteristics of the

different large databases throughout the world are

described elsewhere [21] and discussed below (Table 2).
Spontaneous reporting databases
The spontaneousreporting of a possible adverse drug reaction by health-

care providers to governmental agencies or drug com-
panies (i.e. to the UK Yellow Card Scheme, http://
medicines.mhra.gov.uk/) is an important procedure in

PMS. However, as spontaneous reporting is a passive

system, inconsistent reporting is a limitation with more
frequent reporting for unusual reactions, reactions for
new drugs and serious reactions [22]. Furthermore, the

accuracy of the data contained within the reports is

uncertain. However, spontaneous reporting databases do

contain large amounts of data, for example the Food and

Drug Administration (FDA) spontaneous reporting data-

base contains over 2 million reports over a period of

35 years. These databases can therefore be mined to

obtained details of ADEs. For example, a retrospective

data mining of the FDA spontaneous reporting database

was shown to identify ADEs many years prior to col-
lecting reports alone [23], as is discussed further below.
Prescription event monitoring databases
Prescriptionevent monitoring (PEM) is used to detect ADEs by
collecting high-quality data from family doctors, on a

select group of patients exposed to a specic (new) drug,

for a limited period of time [24]. Heeley 
et al. [25]discuss the role of database exploration in order to detect

ADE signals from a PEM database, which contains 1
million reports of events from 78 PEM studies. They

point out that a limitation of PEM database mining is
the lack of an adequate control group, as the database
contains details of clusters of patients exposed to certain

drugs. For example, tolterodine did not show evidence

of hallucinations as an ADE because the control group

contained patients prescribed other drugs known to
Table 1The steps with rationale and examples, of the knowledge discovery in database (KDD) processStep of KDD processRationaleExample
Denition of the project goalsTo focus the project and determine the data set required To determine any ADE with a COX-2 inhibitors
Data set acquisitionSelect the data set based on goalsThese will include patient demographics, past history, details of all pre
scribing and nonprescribed drugs, all diagnosis and symptoms (including 
gastrointestinal and cardiovascular). Many more variables will be required 
to exclude bias in the analysis and to search for other ADE.Selection of data-base or databasesTo ensure the database contains at least the minimum required variablesThe combination of a linked administrative database and electronic medical recordsData cleaning and preprocessingTo validate seemingly erroneous data entries and calculate additional eldsHysterectomy in males or to calculate socio-economic status from postal codeData miningProcess the dataLink analysis or measure of disproportionality
Data interpretation and utilizationTo identify signal, perform further mining 
if required and to report the nding so 

that further studies can be performed 
Determine a high association with cardiovascular disease and COX-2, report 
this association via Dr Doctor letter and instigate a controlled observational 
study to prove the associationA. M. Wilson et al.
13057:2Br J Clin Pharmacolcause hallucinations. When the data from these patients
were removed, an ADE signal for tolterodine was dis-

covered [25].
Linked administrative databases
Large linked health
administrative databases, such as Medicaid in the USA

and the Ontario provincial databases, contain data on

millions of subjects and may also be used as a source
for data mining. The data are available at relatively small

additional costs and are not subject to recall or
interviewer bias. However, the completeness of details,

such as diagnoses, are questionable in many circum-

stances, and they tend to apply to elderly or low-income

populations only, so may not be representative of the

whole population.The Saskatchewan-linked administrative healthcare
utilization database and the Tayside Medicines Monitor-

ing (MEMO) are examples of linked medical health

databases, and both have been utilized to identify risks

of benzodiazepine therapy [26, 27].
Electronic medical records
Electronic medical records(EMRs) contain a large number of data elds, including

details such as the use of tobacco products, smoking and
nonprescription drugs, symptoms and signs, laboratory
data and social circumstances, on a smaller number of
patients and may also be used for data mining. Becauseof the large number and detail of the variables, which
can be combined to generate new diagnoses or adverse

events, hypotheses, which are not restricted to existing
diagnoses, can be explored. Although Honigman 
et al.[28] have investigated the use of EMR in detecting

known ADEs, there have been no studies of data mining

using EMR.Other databasesClinical trials databases and specialistdatabases such as overdose or toxicology databases may

also contain valuable information. Data mining has been

used to explore cardiovascular clinical trial databases

[29], the US Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System

[30] and a large prescription database [31]. Signals for

liver-related ADEs have been reported from analysis of

a biochemistry laboratory database at a higher rate than
that reported by physicians [32]. Poison information

centres also record details of ADEs and may contribute

to the pharmacovigilance process [33].
Data preprocessingData preprocessing involves data sampling and data
quality verication to ensure the data are clean and well

described. Medical data can contain erroneous data such
as ages of 120 years rather than 20 years, and a docu-

mentation of hysterectomy in males. New variables of

interest to be used in the analysis can be generated fromTable 2Examples of databases used in knowledge discovery in databases for the purposes of pharmacovigilance
Type of databaseExampleAdvantagesDisadvantages
Spontaneous reporting 
databaseWHO Uppsala MonitoringCentreVery large Relatively cheapRequires association to be recognized and report to be 
submittedNot complete (under reporting)
Assess the whole populationNot able to assess incidence rates
No control group

Reporting bias
Prescription event monitoring databaseDrug Safety Research Unit,Southampton, UK 
Large Only a few select drugs
Good quality dataControl group may be inadequate

Identication of association not requiredIncidence rates can be calculatedLarge linked administrativedatabaseMedicaid, USA Very large Not representative of population
Canadian provincial linkedadministrative utilization
databaseRelatively cheapData set may not be accurate for all elds
Capture data of routine clinical careElectronic medical recordsCOMPETE, Hamilton, More extensive data set Small
CanadaExpensive

GPRDData mining in pharmacovigilance
Br J Clin Pharmacol57:2131
the data. For example, it may be possible to estimate
socio-economic status from the postal code.Data mining techniquesPredictive modelling
Predictive modelling is a tech-
nique used to develop a model to relate a dependent

variable with a set of independent variables in a manner
similar to multiple regression analysis. There are two

types of predictive modelling, namely classication, for

categorical dependent variables, and value prediction,

for continuous dependent variables. Classication is

appropriate if the goal is to predict group membership
of new records based on their characteristics (indepen-

dent variables). Using classication, the most inuential

variable is identied and used to split the data intogroups. This is then repeated with the next most inu-

ential variable until the data are fully characterized. For

example, it may be possible to determine a classica-tion criterion or rule that discriminates between differ-

ent groups of patients with and without side-effects

based on age, sex or socio-economic class. Value pre-

diction uses both classication and regression to predict

the future outcome of a patient based on, for example,

their demographic or socio-economic characteristics.
However, we need to use caution as, in any data analy-

sis of continuous outcomes, the results of value predic-

tion can be inuenced by the presence of outliers in the
data.Clustering or database segmentation
Clustering usesan algorithm that segregates a database by evaluating the

dissimilarity between records. Pairs of records are com-

pared by the values of the individual elds within them,

and clustering into groups provides fast and effective

ordering in large datasets. Segmentation could be used

to group patients with similar symptoms or diagnoses to
determine whether there is a drug association. Thus,

clustering is a technique of choice if the goal is to reduce
a large sample of records to a smaller set of specic

homogeneous subgroups (clusters) without losing much
information about the whole sample. Because of the
heterogeneity between clusters, this analysis can also be
helpful in hypothesis development about the nature of

the variation between subgroups. For example, if a data-

base contained details of different cardiac pathologies

(e.g. valvular heart disease) and medication (e.g. fenu-

ramine-phentermine), clustering analysis may have seg-

regated patients according to heart disease and identied

fenuramine-phentermine as one of the main factors in

this group. We could then explore the hypothesis of an

association or causal link between cardiac valvular dis-

ease and fenuramine-phentermine.Link analysisLink analysis refers to methods that iden-tify associations or links between records or sets of data
[34]. It assesses associations by using an if x then ytype rule, by assessing patterns of behaviour or by iden-

tifying similar time sequences of events. In pharma-

covigilance, link analysis could be used to identify

associated factors such as the effect of renal impairment

on the safety prole of diuretics.Deviation detection
Deviation detection looks for out-
liers or values that deviate from the norm and can be

seen either graphically or statistically. Visualization

techniques are used to determine patterns hidden in data,
e.g. scatter plots or histograms, multidimensional
graphs for multivariate data, and time series plots. Sta-

tistics methods are then employed to measure signi-

cance of deviations once they have been detected. This

process could be used to identify patients with idiosyn-
cratic reactions or unusual symptoms, which could be
related to medication and may constitute an ADE signal.

Regression analysis and stratication can be used to

assess the inuence of age, sex and comorbidity on ADE

signal generation.Measures of disproportionality (Figure 1)
To 
ourknowledge, measures of disproportionality are the only

techniques which have been used to identify ADEs.

They have been used by the Netherlands Pharmacovig-

ilance Foundation [35], the UK Yellow Card database

[36], WHO Uppsala Monitoring Centre [37] and PEM

database [25]. Using the denition of a signal as a pro-
portional reporting ratio (see Figure 1) 
>2, c2 >4 andthree or more cases, Evans 
et al. [36] identied 487signals from the Yellow Card database. Of those, 70%

were recognized ADEs, 13% were due to the underlying

disease and 17% were investigated further. Of the latter,

28% were reviewed in detail and in three cases the

manufacturer was requested to change the product

information. Using the Netherlands Pharmacovigilance

Foundation it was possible to identify an association
between delay of withdrawal bleeding during concomi-

tant use of oral contraceptives and itraconazole, which

had previously only been suggested by case reports

[38]. The same authors also assessed the statistical

interaction between the use of diuretics and nonsteroi-

dal anti-inammatory drugs (NSAID), and showed

signicantly higher use in combination, suggesting an
effect of NSAID on diuretic use. In a retrospective study

Lindquist et al. [39] dened an ADE subsequently
reported in the medical literature as the gold standard,
and reported that the Bayesian Condence Propagation

Neural Network (BCPNN) method at the WHO Uppsala
A. M. Wilson et al.
13257:2Br J Clin PharmacolMonitoring Centre had a 46% positive predictive value
and a 84% negative predictive value. More recently,

Bate et al. [40] have demonstrated the use of the
BCPNN Data Mining approach to detect signals of spe-
cic adverse drug reactions and also adverse events as

a drug class effect. They demonstrated the association

of pericarditis with practolol but not with other 
b-block-ers, the association of captopril and other angiotensin-
converting enzymes with cough, and the association

with terfenadine and heart rate and rhythm disorders.

Puijenbroek et al. [41] discuss the advantages and dis-
advantages of the different methods of disproportional-

ity and show that although they were comparable, the

Information Component (see Figure 1) was the most

versatile but required knowledge of Bayesian statistics.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) uses a
data mining algorithm called the Multi-item Gamma
Poisson Shrinker (MGPS) to interrogate their spontane-

ous reporting database, as this has the ability to look at
drugdrug interactions. The MGPS algorithm examines

the ratio of an observed ADE to the total number of

ADEs (over 56 million) in order to detect a signal using

Bayesian statistical analysis. In a retrospective study the

MPGS was shown to identify 20 out of 30 known ADEs

15 years prior to detection by standard methods [23].

The same authors also show that the number signal

scores (the adjusted ratio of observed to expected

counts) increased for rhabdomyolysis with cerivastatin

from 1998 until 2001, when this drug was voluntarily

withdrawn from the market [23].
Data interpretation and utilization
It is likely that the
KDD process will have to be repeated many times with

redenition of the goals and further analysis in light of
the results of previous mining attempts. However, once

a signal is identied then the degree of causation needs

to be determined. Clearly the strength of the signal is
important, but other criteria, suggested by Bradford-

Hill, including the consistency and specicity of the

nding, temporality, and plausibility, are required [42].

The Medicines Control Agency applies SNIP criteria

(the Strength of the signal, whether it is New, clinically

Important or whether there is potential for Preventative

measures), each criterion being independently associ-
ated with a signal generation [43]. Often causation is not
conrmed and other methods such as casecontrol stud-
ies are required to examine the ADE [44, 45]. Once a

potential ADE is identied and further investigation

substantiates the adverse effect, this information needs

to be quickly disseminated via reports to medical prac-
titioners, e.g. the Dear Doctor letters, or articles in the
medical literature [46]. In this way the medical commu-

nity can be educated and steps can be put into place to
reduce ADEs, making drug therapy less hazardous for

patients.What KDD can and cannot doIt is currently not possible to link all available datasets
together and run one of the data mining techniques to
identify all possible adverse events. Data mining pro-

cesses are not able to account for inaccurate or missingFigure 1Denitions of measures of disproportionality
 Suspected event All other events
 Suspected drug A 
B All other drugs C 
D Measure Definition Utilization Reporting Odds Ratio 
(ROR) A/C B/D  Netherlands 
Pharmacoviligance 
Foundation Yules Q ratio 
AD-BC 
AD+BC 

  Proportional reporting ratio  
(PRR) A/(A+C) C/(C+D) 
 UK Yellow Card Information component 
(IC)  log2  p(x,y) 
       p(x)p(y) 

 WHO Uppsala Monitoring 
Centre Where  p(x) = probability that drug x listed on case sheet  
p(y) = probability that ADE y listed on case sheet   
p(y,x) = probability that drug-ADE combination x  
and y listed on case sheet 
Data mining in pharmacovigilance
Br J Clin Pharmacol57:2133
data, and if a signal is not detected it is impossible todetermine whether no ADE exists or the data are insuf-

cient. Furthermore, KDD only generates a signal and,
in the context of pharmacovigilance, further studies or

investigations will be required to conrm a potential

ADE.However, by being open minded, it is possible to
search for many different ADEs at once. Also, informa-

tion in many databases is under-utilized, and therefore

KDD may be possible to generate new information from

existing data sources at minimal extra cost. KDD will
not replace traditional methods of pharmacovigilance,

but if used in conjunction may reduce the time requiredfor ADE identication [23]. It is impossible to predict

the actual circumstances in which KDD will contribute

to pharmacovigilance, but one would suspect that rare

and atypical events, clusters of symptoms and signs not

yet formulated in a diagnosis and common diagnoses
not recognized as drug-related could all be agged ear-

lier and more reliably by employing systematic data

mining techniques. Regular and repetitive analyses of

accumulating data could maximize the opportunity to
detect a signal of an ADE which is only evident after

prolonged usage. In the future it may be possible to
perform continuous data mining analysis, e.g. link anal-
ysis, on large electronic medical records to identify sig-

nals in a cost-effective manner.
ConclusionWe have described the steps in KDD, the different sta-
tistical processes available during the data mining

procedure, and discussed examples of where these

techniques have been used in pharmacovigilance. When

considering the frequency and signicance of ADEs, as

well as the inadequacy of premarketing ADE evaluation,

it is clear that cost-effective methods of quickly identi-

fying potential ADEs are required. Given the availability

of larger datasets and faster computer processing

speeds, we suggest that data mining techniques will
have a greater role in pharmacovigilance in the future.
A.H. is the recipient of a Career Investigator Award from
the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
References1Pirmohamed M, Breckenridge AM, Kitteringham NR, Park BK. 
Adverse drug reactions. Br Med J 1998; 316: 12958.
2Patel P, Zed PJ. Drug-related visits to the emergency department: 
how big is the problem? Pharmacotherapy 2002; 22: 91523.
3Juntti-Patinen L, Neuvonen PJ. Drug-related deaths in a University 
central hospital. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2002; 58: 47982.
4Bates DW, Cullen DJ, Laird N et al. Incidence of adverse drug 
events and potential adverse drug events. Implications for 
prevention. ADE Prevention Study Group. JAMA 1995; 274: 29

34.
5Leape LL, Cullen DJ, Clapp MD et al. Pharmacist participation on 
physician rounds and adverse drug events in the intensive care 
unit. JAMA 1999; 282: 26770.
6Bates DW, Leape LL, Cullen DJ et al. Effect of computerized 
physician order entry and a team intervention on prevention of 
serious medication errors. JAMA 1998; 280: 131116.
7Honig PK, Woosley RL, Zamani K, Conner DP, Cantilena LR Jr. 
Changes in the pharmacokinetics and electrocardiographic 

pharmacodynamics of terfenadine with concomitant 

administration of erythromycin. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1992; 52: 

231
8.8Ioannidis JP, Lau J. Completeness of safety reporting in 
randomized trials: an evaluation of 7 medical areas. JAMA 2001; 

285: 43
743.9Mukherjee D, Nissen SE, Topol EJ. Risk of cardiovascular events 
associated with selective COX-2 inhibitors. JAMA 2001; 286: 

9549.
10Bombardier C, Laine L, Reicin A et al. Comparison of upper 
gastrointestinal toxicity of rofecoxib and naproxen in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis. VIGOR Study Group. N Engl J Med 2000; 

343: 15208.
11Edwards IR. The accelerating need for pharmacovigilance.J Roy 
Coll Physicians Lond 2000; 34: 4851.
12Friedman MA, Woodcock J, Lumpkin MM, Shuren JE, Hass AE, 
Thompson LJ. The safety of newly approved medicines: do recent 
market removals mean there is a problem? JAMA 1999; 281: 

172834.
13Chakrabarti S. Mining the web: Discovering knowledge from 
hypertext data.  Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA, 

2002.14Chowdhury GG. Template mining for information extraction from 
digital documents. Library Trends 1999; 48: 181207.
15Kwansnik BH. The role of classication in knowledge 
representation and discovery. Library Trends 1999; 48: 2247.
16Amery WK. Signal generation from spontaneous adverse event 
reports. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 1999; 8: 14750.
17Helma C, Gottmann E, Kramer S. Knowledge discovery and data 
mining in toxicology. Stat Meth Med Res 2000; 9: 32958.
18Coulter DM, Bate A, Meyboom RH, Lindquist M, Edwards IR. 
Antipsychotic drugs and heart muscle disorder in international 

pharmacovigilance: data mining study. extra. Details of methods: 

explanation of data mining methods. Br Med J 2001; 322: 1207

9.19Brown EG. Effects of coding dictionary on signal generation: a 
consideration of use of MedDRA compared with WHO-ART. Drug 

Saf 2002; 25: 44552.
20Brown EG, Wood L, Wood S. The medical dictionary for regulatory 
activities (MedDRA). Drug Saf 1999; 20: 10917.
21Strom BL. How should one perform pharmacoepidemiology 
studies? Choosing among the available alternatives. In 
A. M. Wilson et al.
13457:2Br J Clin PharmacolPharmacoepidemiology, 3rd edn, ed Strom BL. Chichester: John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2000; 40113.
22Biriell C, Edwards R. Reasons for reporting adverse drug reactions 
 some thoughts based on an international review. 

Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 1997; 6: 216.
23Szarfman A, Machado SG, ONeill RT. Use of screening algorithms 
and computer systems to efciently signal higher-than-expected 

combinations of drugs and events in the US FDAs spontaneous 

reports database. Drug Saf 2002; 25: 38192.
24Mann RD. Prescription-event monitoringrecent progress and 
future horizons. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1998; 46: 195201.
25Heeley E, Wilton LV, Shakir SA. Automated signal generation in 
prescription-event monitoring. Drug Saf 2002; 25: 42332.
26Rawson NS, Rawson MJ. Acute adverse event signalling scheme 
using the Saskatchewan Administrative health care utilization 
datales: results for two benzodiazepines. Can J Clin Pharmacol 

1999; 6: 15966.
27Barbone F, McMahon AD, Davey PG et al. Association of road-
trafc accidents with benzodiazepine use. Lancet 1998; 352: 

1331
6.28Honigman B, Lee J, Rothschild J et al. Using computerized data 
to identify adverse drug events in outpatients. J Am Med Inform 

Assoc 2001; 8: 25466.
29Cerrito P. Application of data mining for examining polypharmacy 
and adverse effects in cardiology patients. Cardiovasc Toxicol 

2001; 1:
 1779.30Niu MT, Erwin DE, Braun MM. Data mining in the US Vaccine 
Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS): early detection of 

intussusception and other events after rotavirus vaccination. 

Vaccine 2001; 19: 462734.
31Bytzer P, Hallas J. Drug-induced symptoms of functional dyspepsia 
and nausea. A symmetry analysis of one million prescriptions. 

Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2000; 14: 
147984.
32Bagheri H, Michel F, Lapeyre-Mestre M et al. Detection and 
incidence of drug-induced liver injuries in hospital: a prospective 
analysis from laboratory signals. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2000; 50: 

47984.
33Mey C, Hentschel H, Hippius M, Balogh A. Documentation and 
evaluation of adverse drug reactions (ADR)  contribution from a 
poison information center. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 2002; 40: 

1027.
34Perner P, Petrou M. Machine learning and data mining in pattern 
recognition. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1999.
35Egberts AC, Meyboom RH, van Puijenbroek EP. Use of measures 
of disproportionality in pharmacovigilance: three Dutch examples. 

Drug Saf 2002; 25: 4538.
36Evans SJ, Waller PC, Davis S. Use of proportional reporting ratios 
(PRRs) for signal generation from spontaneous adverse drug 

reaction reports. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2001; 10: 

4836.37Bate A, Lindquist M, Edwards IR, Orre R. A data mining 
approach for signal detection and analysis. Drug Saf 2002; 25: 

393
7.38van Puijenbroek EP, Egberts AC, Meyboom RH, Leufkens HG. 
Signalling possible drugdrug interactions in a spontaneous 
reporting system: delay of withdrawal bleeding during 

concomitant use of oral contraceptives and itraconazole. Br J Clin 

Pharmacol 1999; 47: 68993.
39Lindquist M, Stahl M, Bate A, Edwards IR, Meyboom RH. A 
retrospective evaluation of a data mining approach to aid nding 

new adverse drug reaction signals in the WHO international 
database. Drug Saf 2000; 23: 53342.
40Bate A, Lindquist M, Orre R, Edwards IR, Meyboom RH. Data-
mining analyses of pharmacovigilance signals in relation to 

relevant comparison drugs. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2002; 58: 483

90.41van Puijenbroek EP, Bate A, Leufkens HG, Lindquist M, Orre R, 
Egberts AC. A comparison of measures of disproportionality for 

signal detection in spontaneous reporting systems for adverse 

drug reactions. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2002; 11: 310.
42Shakir SA, Layton D. Causal association in pharmacovigilance and 
pharmacoepidemiology: thoughts on the application of the Austin 

Bradford-Hill criteria. Drug Saf 2002; 25: 46771.
43van Puijenbroek EP, van Grootheest K, Diemont WL, Leufkens HG, 
Egberts AC. Determinants of signal selection in a spontaneous 

reporting system for adverse drug reactions. Br J Clin Pharmacol 

2001; 52
: 57986.
44Dunn N, Freemantle S, Mann R. Nicorandil and diabetes: a nested 
casecontrol study to examine a signal generated by prescription-
event monitoring. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1999; 55: 15962.
45Kaufman DW, Rosenberg L, Mitchell AA. Signal generation and 
clarication: use of casecontrol data. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug 

Saf 2001; 10: 197203.
46Meyboom RH, Lindquist M, Egberts AC, Edwards IR. Signal 
selection and follow-up in pharmacovigilance. Drug Saf 2002; 25: 

45965.
