European Journal of Adapted Physical Act
ivity, 2
(1), 
4661  European Federation of Adapted Physical Activity, 2009
  EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 46 A CONTEMPORARY REVIE
W OF ENGLISH LANGUAG
E LITERATURE ON 
INCLUSION OF STUDENT
S WITH DISABILITIES 
IN PHYSICAL EDUCATIO
N: A 
EUROPEAN PERSPECTIVE
  Deirdre OBrien
 EMMAPA Student; Faculty of Physical Culture at Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic
 Martin
 
 Faculty of Physical Culture at Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic
 Peter 
David Howe
 Loughborough University
, Peter Harrison Centre for Disability Sport, UK
   The 
state of inclusion for students with disabilities in general physical educat
ion (GPE) varies 
across European countries. In many countries inclusive physical education is still a developing 
practice. The purpose of this review of literature published in English is to highlight current debates 

surrounding the inclusion of students w
ith disabilities in physical education, in hope that there 
might be a degree of consensus of opinion surrounding the facilitation of inclusive practices within 

Europe.  This review covers an eight year period commencing in early 2000.   A total of twenty 

seven articles are highlighted in this review using the Theoretical Model for the Study of Classroom 
Teaching (Dunkin 
 Biddle, 1974) which suggests that study of teaching and learning involve four 
variables: presage (teacher), context (students), process (
interaction) and product. The ultimate aim 
of this review is to use recent publications in the field of APA to highlight a need for the 

establishment of professional guidelines for   successful implementation of good practice within 

GPE throughout Europe
.  KEYWORDS:
 physical education, integration, inclusion, mainstreaming, and disabilities
. INTRODUCTION
 Authors in the field of adapted physical 
education articulate different definitions of 

inclusion.  Lieberman and Houston
-Wilson 
(2002) described inclusio
n as providing 

services to students with disabilities in the 

typical classroom environment rather than 

removing them from it in order to receive 

special services. To others inclusion is 

viewed as a cohesive sense of community, 

acceptance of differences a
nd responsiveness in 

individual needs 
(Stainback & Stainback, 

1996).  Miller (1994)
 viewed inclusion as the 
point in the continuum of services which places 

the student with a disability in regular 

education classrooms, with appropriate support 

personnel, t
o receive an education and related 
services alongside peers. Overall the term 

inclusion is associated with providing services 

to ensure that all students regardless of their 
ability can achieve their full potential in an 

appropriate educational setting.
 It is generally believed that all students 
with disabilities should experience 

participating in regular physical education 

lessons with their friends as part of their 

growth and development 
(BAALPE, 1996)
.  Research has been conducted in the area of 

includin
g students with disabilities in 

mainstream schools, but research directly 

associated with physical education is still in 

short supply. Research conducted recently 

however suggests that inclusion in physical 

education can effectively work for the child 

with
 a disability (Goodwin & Watkinson, 
2000) and this can be achieved without 

negatively affecting peers without disabilities
 (Faison
-Hodge & Porretta, 2004;
 Obrusnkov, 
et al., 2003). It is essential for educators to 

determine how much support a child needs
 to 
receive appropriate physical education within 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 47 the general physical education (GPE) setting 
(Block & Krebs, 1992)
 since  within physical 
education there is believed to be a continuum 

of placement options with different levels of 

inclusion (Block, 2007).
   Inclusion of 
students with disabilities in GPE has been the 

focus of growing number of studies in the last 

20 years.  Block and Vogler (1994) reviewed 

literature with regard to inclusive school 

settings. Their initial findings were favourable 

towards in
clusion.  More recently Block and 

Obrusnkov (2007) reviewed a ten year period 

from 1995 to 2005 and 
they concurred with the 
earlier findings of Block and Vogler (1994) 

also found numerous positive outcomes of 

inclusion in GPE
.  
METHOD
 This review examine
s the literature 
regarding inclusion of students with disabilities 

in physical education from the year 2000 to 

2008.  Various databases were accessed, these 

including SPORTDiscus, Health Medline, 

ProQuest and PsycINFO. A grand total of 114 

articles were so
urced from a broad selection of 
journals.  Conscious of the inadequacy of many 

of the articles relevance to the literature 

review, the researcher re
-examined the articles 
and applied a specifically designed five criteria 

to increase the focus of the study
: (a) must be 
published in English, as this is the first 

langu
age of two of the three authors,
 (b) must 
be directly related to physical education or 

physical act
ivity with a focus on inclusion,
 (c) 
must be an original study;  (d) must be 
published between 
2000 to
 2008, and (e) must 
be published in journals, thus excluding books, 
unpublished papers, doctoral dissertations and 

master theses. Having sourced 114 articles 

originally, 27 proved suitable after 

implementing the selection criteria. The review 

that f
ollows is based upon the Theoretical 
Model for the Study of Classroom Teaching 
(Dunkin 
 Biddle, 1974) adopted within 


Dunkin 
 Biddle suggested that study of 
teaching and learning involve four key 
variables: pr
esage (teacher), context (students), 
process (interaction) and product. Presage 

variables include those influencing teaching 
behaviour of PE teachers. Context variables 

include background of students, their skills, 

and attitudes toward physical activities 
or 

previous experiences. Process variables include 

student
-student interaction, teacher
-student 
interaction, teacher behaviours and student 

behaviours. Within the sample of articles the  

prevalence of focus upon the variables 

articulated by Dunkin and Bidd
le (1974) was a 

follows (a) Presage var
iables 
- teachers (13 
articles),
 (b) Context va
riables 
- students (2 
articles),
 (c) Process variables 
- interacti
on in 
inclusive PE (9 articles),
 and (d) Product 
variables 
- effectiveness of inclusive PE (3).  
Some of
 the articles related to more than one 
key area as various authors investigated more 

than one variable within a study with particular 

overlap of issues related to process and product 

variables
.  
RESULTS
 Presage variables 
 Teachers in Inclusive 
Physical Ed
ucation
 In accordance with Theoretical Model for 
the Study of Classroom Teaching (Dunkin 
 Biddle, 1974) articles focusing on teacher 

formative experiences, teacher training 

experiences, and teacher properties were 

included in the presage variables results
. Preservice Training of Teachers
 In accordance with Sherrill (2004) it is 
important to prepare future physical education 

teachers engage with inclusive practices for 

students with disabilities in GPE settings. In 

order to prepare these teachers
-in-trainin
g we 
must be able to measure and to understand their 

attitudes towards inclusion. Hodge et al
. (2003) 
selected a purposeful sample of ten teachers
-in-training all majoring in physical education and 

enrolled in an adapted physical education 

(APE) course to 
explore the meaning of 
practicum experiences.  Over an eight week 

period as part of the APE course students 

participated in a Unified Physical Activity 

Program (UPAP).  Data were collected via self
-reflective journals.  Results from the study 

revealed that
 the experience of planning and 
incorporating inclusive practices impacted 

favourably on the teachers
-in-training overall 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 48 confidence and attitudes towards teaching 
children with disabilities. At the end of the 

study teachers
-in-training showed a positive 
attitude to an integrated physical activity 
environment.  Establishing a routine with the 

children, having a variety of activities and 

carefully planning each lesson with a readiness 

for flexibility were aspects evident of the 

students teaching that worked
 well. This 
allowed for meaningful interactions and 

experiences.  The UPAP program was a great 

initial starting point for these students to gain a 

hands-on experience. Hodge et al.
 (2003) 
further highlighted that many of the 

experiences and skills gained t
hrough this 
practicum can be easily transferred into a 

physical education class environment.  
 In another study Hardin and Brent (2005) 
explored how the Physical Education Teacher 

Education training curriculum has affected the 

competence and confidence of 
practising 

physical education teachers.  Five newly 

qualified teachers who taught students with 

disabilities were selected to be interviewed 

enquiring about their education, training and 

inclusion in physical education.  The 

assortment of Q
-sort cards (fil
e cards that 
contain 
personality statements)
 that teachers 
had to organise and rank in accordance with 

their self
-understanding    Results from the Q
-sort cards revealed that teachers felt that the 

experience of teaching was the best resource 

for learning 
how to teach students with 

disabilities.  Other teachers and course work 

were also seen as vital tools.   The majority of 

the teachers experience of course work was 

only based upon one class taken on adapted 

physical activity with three of the five teache
rs 
not experiencing teaching students with 

disabilities during this time. Hardin and Brent 

(2005) commented that one class of training for 

teachers in adapted physical education is not 

sufficient.  This assertion is in line wi
th the 

thoughts of Kozub et al
. (1999) who have 
suggested that teacher training has a large 

impact on how future physical education 

teachers develop their knowledge of disabilities 

and their understanding of differences in 

students.  The understanding of students with 

disabilities and 
their associated differences is a 
stepping stone to overall acceptance and 

inclusion within physical education settings
.  Attitudes of PE teachers towards inclusion
 A vital part of inclusion is the teachers 
attitudes. Attitudinal instruments are vital too
ls 
for researchers, as they provide them with a 

means of collecting their data and analyzing it.  

Various instruments have been used throughout 

the studies in this review. The Physical 

Educators Judgements about Inclusion (PEJI) 

instrument was developed b
y Hod
ge et al.
 (2002).  This instrument is designed to 

establish the attitudes of physical education 

teacher education (PETE) pre
-service teachers 
towards inclusion of students with disabilities 

in GPE.  The instrument constitu
tes three areas 

of exploratio
n (a
) Social Judgement, (b) 
Contact, and (c
) Planned Behaviour, which 
together can be analysed to establish teaching 

competence as it relates to inclusive aims.  

Eighteen PETE pre
-service and experienced 
teachers were selected for the focus group, 

which co
mprised ten females and eight males.  
All participants had taken at least one course 

on teaching students with disabilities in PE.  To 

generate validity of the new instrument, it was 

distributed to two hundred and seventy two 

PETE pre
-service teachers.  Th
ree main 
subscales were reveale
d from the study, these 

being: (a
) judgements abo
ut inclusion versus 
exclusion, (b
) judgements about acceptance of 

students with disabilities, and (c
) judgements 
about perceived training needs.  
 
 (2002) develo
ped 
instrument based on the Theory of Planned 
Beha
viour developed by Ajzen (1991)
. The 
Attitude Towards Inclusion of Students with 
Physical Disabilities in Physical Education 

(ATIPDPE), which was later revised by 


-R having 
greate
r number of items in attitudinal subscale 
following suggestions from previous studies 

using ATIPDPE.  This instrument measures 

three psychological components of Inclu
sive 

Physical Education (IPE): (a) attitudes toward 

IPE, (b) subjective norm toward IPE, a
nd (c
) perceived behavioural control in relation to 

IPE. 
 Teachers perceptions of students abilities 
(Karper & Martinek, 1985) have an impact on 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 49 both student learning opportunities and 
participation. Smith (2004) purposively 

selected seven experienced te
achers to 

interview.  He examined the inclusion of 

students with Special Educational Needs (SEN) 

in secondary school physical education.  The 

use of open questions provided a greater range 

of questions and the opportunity to probe 

certain topics which aros
e in the interviews.  
Results illustrated the demands teachers face 

with inclusion.  Teachers believed it was 

unsuitable to teach a full class of twenty eight 

students and also include SEN students within 

this context.  Equal opportunities for all was 

the general philosophy of all teachers, yet 
many students with SEN were not given the 

same opportunities as their peers. While team 

games were a strong and traditional part of the 

curriculum, all teachers collectively stated this 

area as the most difficult w
ithin which to 
actively engage in inclusive practices.  

Teachers highlighted individual activities as 

much more appropriate for instigation inclusive 

practices but this by there very nature make it 

difficult to institute a philosophy of inclusion.   

Smith 
(2004) outlined that often students with 
SEN are expected to fit into the curriculum, 

rather than adaptations made to ensure the 

inclusion of these students.  He further suggests 

that for inclusion to take place, the curriculum 

needs to be more flexible 
and to move away 

from the strong focus on team sports.  This 

study was one of the few to be based solely 

upon qualitative data and as such interpretation 

of result maybe opens to continued re
-interpretat
ion. In another study Morley et al.
 (2005) explored t
he perceptions of forty three 
secondary school teachers views towards 

inclusion in mainstream physical education.  

Understanding, awareness, extra planning and 

organisation were highlighted as variables the 

teachers were aware that needed to be adapted.  

Teachers perceptions of their own inadequacy 

and lack of confidence were mentioned, you 

want to help them; you want them to do their 

best, you want to include them but its knowing 

how to adapt it (teaching and instructions) to 

suit them (Morley et al.,
 2005). This suggests 
that Indoor and individual activities were seen 

as easier to include students in, while outdoor 
and team activities were viewed as more 

problematic.  The severity and type of 

disability was cause for concern as behavioural 

and emotion
al impairments were deemed the 

most challenging for successful inclusion. 

Teachers also remarked on the effect on the 

students without disabilities, I do think about 

other members of the group wondering if that 

person is holding them back (Morley et al.,
 
2005).  Morley et. al. also highlight that the 

majority of teachers commented on the 

inadequate and lack of resources and support, 

and teacher training.  Regarding training they 

commented, None at all, we are not trained or 

It wasnt catered for in my 
teacher training
 (Morley et al., 2005)
.   Teachers Concerns and Perception about 
Barriers in Inclusive PE
 For teachers to feel somewhat 
apprehensive about taking students with 

disabilities into their physical education is 

understandable.
  They would natu
rally wonder 
as to how they are going to include and 

motivate all students with and wi
thout 

disabilities.
  Lienert et
 al. (2001) interviewed 
thirty physical educators from Germany and 

United States to discover the concerns teachers 

have in regard to inclus
ion of students with and 
without disabilities in physical education.  

Purposeful sampling was used to select sixteen 

teachers from Berlin and fourteen from Texas. 

This study was directed by the Concerns
-Based 
Adoption Model (CBAM).  An interview guide 

comp
rised semi
-structured questions and a 
demographic questionnaire was used. Concerns 
were reported for four of the seven s
tages of 
the CBAM, which were: (a) personal, (b
) management
, (c) consequence, and (d
) collaboration, with management being of 

paramount 
importance.  Culturally the teacher 
in the United States
 had more personal 
concerns and worries about everyday demands 

and competency to meet those demands the 

needs of pupils with disabilities.  Some 

teachers 
in the United States 
did not try to 
teach the 
students with disabilities, instead they 

handed over responsibility to the para
-professionals. The German teachers felt it was 

very important to have the choice whether to 

teach integrated classes or not. This research 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 50 suggests that all teachers were unsat
isfied with 
facilities, equipment and the high ratio of 
students with disabilities in their classes.  

Collaboration in a supportive environment was 

collectively viewed as highly important by 

teachers in both countries.  Encouragingly 

overall in both countr
ies the teachers stated that 
the positive effects of inclusion were far greater 

than the negative effects.
 Similarly Hodge et al. (2004) examined the 
beliefs and behaviours of nine secondary 

school physical education teachers in relation 

to including stude
nts with disabilities.  This 
study again uses purposeful sampling to select 

the seven male and two female experienced 

teachers.  Results from the interviews and 

questionnaires outlined that teachers expressed 

both positive and negative beliefs about 

inclus
ion.  On the positive side the teachers 
who contributed to the study felt that inclusion 

was good conceptually but often there were 

many barriers to overcome to achieve 

successful inclusion. The inability to give the 

time and individual attention to the 
students 

especially those with severe disabilities due to 

lack of support was a recurring theme.  The 

majority of teachers commented that the 

availability of support impacted upon the 

efficacy of their teaching.  Many teachers did 

not know how to adequatel
y adapt their 
teaching environments to be safe and inclusive.  

The pre
-service training of these teachers 
indicated that only five out of the nine had an 

adapted physical education module included in 

their undergraduate studies. However nine 
participants i
n a study is a relatively small 
number to ensure that a genuine and varied 

perspective of PE teachers was obtained.
 Meegan and MacPhail (2006) questioned 
general expectations of physical education 

teachers to be fully committed to teaching 

students with di
sabilities, suggesting 
thatinstitutions of higher education are failing 

to prepare teachers
-in-training with the skills 
required for the inclusion of all students. In 

another study that examined the barriers of 

GPE teachers when including students with 

vis
ual impairments, Lieberman et al. (2002) 
found that the most common barrier identified 

was a deficit in professional preparation.  An 
in-service workshop on physical education for 
students with visual impairments was attended 

by one hundred and forty eight
 teachers, who 
had visually impaired students in their physical 

education classes.  A questionnaire distributed 

prior to the workshop was used to determine 

the perceived barriers facing teachers.  Results 

disclosed that 66% of teachers found lack of 

profes
sional preparation as the main barrier.  
Other barriers identified were lack of 

equipment (63%) and programming or 

curriculum (57%). Many teachers felt 

unprepared to incorporate students with visual 

disabilities into the class.  Lieberman and 

colleagues su
ggested that the curriculum of the 
teacher training programmes needs to be 

altered to meet the needs of physical education 

teachers.  Teacher training is a clear 

problematic area with regard to inclusion, but it 

is a problem that can be rectified.
 Fejgin e
t al. (2005) used a questionnaire to 
examine the relationship between inclusion and 

burnout in physical education.  The data were 

collected from three hundred and sixty three 

elementary school physical education teachers 

across six districts in Israel.  Bu
rnout was 
found to be related to the number of students 

with SEN in a class, the support available, and 

work place conditions.  A strong correlation 

was discovered between the structural and 

social dimensions of a school in relation to 

causing burnout.  Th
ese teachers also viewed 

inclusion as problematic because of the 

additional time requirements, the discipline of 

students, evaluation and classroom 
management depending on the severity of the 
students impairments. Behaviour, learning 

problems and lack of 
support was another area 

linked to burnout. Simil
arly to other studies 
Fejgin et
 al. (2005) highlighted that teachers do 
not have any pre
-service training on how to 
include students with SEN in physical 

education.  This is a recurring trend seen 

throughout
 many countries.
 The studies in this section used a 
combination of interviews and questionnaires 

to retrieve their data.  One study used an 

interview, two studies used questionnaires and 

one study used a combination of both.  The 

outcomes varied throughout
 these studies.  
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 51 Overall, the main concerns and barriers 
identified were professional preparation, 

management and support
.   Support Personnel in Inclusive Physical 
Education
  Equal participation between all students 
in PE is strengthened by a combination 
of 

teacher and APE consultant, teacher and 

teacher assistant or teacher and peer tutor 

support systems (Murata & Jansma, 1997).  

Two main sources of support personnel, para
-educators and APE teachers were identified in 

the articles consulted for this revie
w, were 
considered vital to inclusive practices. Davis
 et al. (2007) distributed questionnaires to 

determine what actual were the responsibilities 

and training needs of paraeducators within 

physical education.  Seventy six paraeducators 

responded to the qu
estionnaire (99% female).  

Responses in this study revealed 61% believed 

that they were adequately trained for physical 

education, but surprisingly only 16% had 

received training in adapted physical education. 

The majority of the paraeducators interviewed 

had simply completed one
-day training course.  
38% participated in physical education with a 

student.  The level of participation varied 

greatly from the majority escorting the students 

and giving prompt cues to directly working 

with the students during PE
.  Assisting in 
assessment and sharing individual educational 

plan (IEP) suggestions was carried out by 28%.  

Paraeducators felt they needed to know the IEP 

goals of each child to help develop and 

reinforce those goals.  Encouragingly 90% 
were willing to b
e trained in physical 
education, but requesting incentives to do so. 
Authors highlighted five responsibilities that 

paraeducators can improve in physical 

education with students
. These responsibilities 
were: (a
) assis
tance with social interaction, (b
) tran
sfer from on
e activity to the next, (c) 
safety, (d
) interaction with students, and (e
) cooperative learning among students and 

reinforcing instructions for the teacher.  
 Probably the best and most effective form 
of support to a physical education teacher 
is 

that of the adapted physical education teacher.  

They have undergone specialised training and 

have a true understanding of the inclusion 
process.  A study by Lytle and Collier (2002) 

investigated APE specialists perceptions of 

consultation.  Six partic
ipants were involved in 
the study, four female and two male, with age 

ranging from thirty five to forty six years and 

case loads of students ranging from twenty four 

to one hundred and ten.  Data was collected 

through interview, field observations, 

researc
her notes and focus group interactions.  

Results indicated that the skills, attitudes and 

knowledge of the APE specialist combined 

with the educational environment were 

influential factors in the types of services 

provided.  The use of consultations and th
eir 

implementation were often influenced by the 

social, intellectual and physical environment.  

All participants commented that no formal 

training in consultation was provided as part of 

their training.  In another study Lytle and 

Hutchinson (2004) explore
d the experiences 
and roles of APE teachers primarily through 

the use of observations and interviews.  

Experienced teachers in APE were used in the 

study, four being female and two male.  When 

the data were analysed various roles of the 

APE teacher were pr
esented: (a) ad
vocator, (b) 
educator, (c) courier, (d) resource coordinator,
 and (e) supporter/helper. There were some 

negative reactions to the supporter/helper role, 

as the situation of territorial issues with the 

GPE teacher often arose.  Overall it was
 highlighted that the various roles in the 

consultation process is a huge part of the APE 

teachers daily life.  Specific training in 

consultation was not part of the participants 
APE training.  Lytle and Hutchinson suggested 
that more training in areas s
uch as adult 
interactions and effective communication in the 

consultation process is required.
 
 al. (2008) 
studied the nature of 
work and roles of public school adapted 

physical educators in selected school districts 

in the United States with th
e aim of adding to 
the information base to enable the 

improvement of service delivery and 

professional preparation. Participants of the 

study were 6 females and 2 males with 

experience teaching (range of 2
23 years) in 
the field of APE. Data collection inc
luded 
individual in depths interviews, demographic 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 52 data sheets and interview notes. Results 
showed the differences in the nature of work 

among APE specialists. Participants had high 

teaching loads (44
90 students) and served 
wide range of schools (1
20), w
hich created 
quite different teaching profiles. Most teachers 

were involved in APE consulting. Results also 

indicated the needs to incorporate issues of 

consulting into teacher preparation and change 

the university studies more relevant to real life 

teach
ing
.  Context Variables 
 Students in Inclusive 

Physical Education
 Dunkin and Biddle (1974) highlighted in 
their Theoretical Model for the Study of 

Classroom Teaching the importance of 

studying students in learning process. Under 

context variables they fo
cused on learner 
properties (students with and without 

disabilities), and school, community and 

classroom contexts
. Students without disabilities
 The perception and attitudes of students 
without disabilities can have a substantial 

impact on the success of 
inclusion in a GPE 

class.  From the previous studies inclusion of 

students with and without disabilities can be 

successfully implemented
. In relation to this 
Verderber et
 al. (2003) used the theory of 
planned behaviour to investigate the intentions 

of midd
le school students to engage with 

students with severe disabilities in GPE.  350 

grade sixth to eight students completed the 

Verderber Inventory of Students Intention to 

Participate in Inclusive Physical Education 
(VISIPIPE), with its validity proved at t
he 
commencement of the study.  Results indicated 
that students believed they should work and 

play with students with severe disabilities, but 

these beliefs were primarily motivated by 

abiding with the beliefs of parents and teachers.  

In comparison student
s did not believe that 
friends had the same beliefs.  Overall the study 

showed that teachers and parents can have an 

influence on middle grade students beliefs and 

attitudes towards others. 
 Other study, using the theory of planned 
behavior
 Kodish et al. 
(2006) examined the 
determinants of physical activity in an 
inclusive setting.  Kodish and colleagues used 

four classes containing one hundred and 

fourteen students aged ten to thirteen. 
Class 

one (C1) and class three (C3) were physical 

education classes t
hat each had four students 
with autism included in them (
n = 63), while 
class two (C2) and class four (C4) were GPE 

classes without students with identified 

disabilities included (
n = 51). 
None of the 
students with autism has received any direct 

support wi
thin physical education.  The 
physical education teacher used the Dynamic 

Physical Education Curriculum (DPE) which is 

positive towards inclusion. Questionnaires and 

electronic pedometers were used for 

assessment. The pedometer measured the steps 

taken and
 activity time over a two week period. 
Results showed that student intentions to be 

physically active lead in actual behaviour. 

Results also indicated that the subjective norm 

and perceived behavioural control were critical 

predictors of students intenti
ons to be 
physically active.   
 The main message that is outlined in the 
studies above is that successful inclusion in 

physical education can take place effectively.  

The two studies including students with severe 

disabilities and autism, used questionnair
es to 
establish their results. The third study used a 

pre and post
-test design to establish their 
results on the inclusion of a student with 

muscle dystrophy.  All the studies revealed that 

inclusion can be implemented without any 

negative impact on any of
 the students
.   Process Variables 
 Interaction in Inclusive 
Physical Education
 In accordance with Theoretical Model for 
the Study of Classroom Teaching (Dunkin 
 Biddle, 1974) articles focusing on teacher
 classroom behavior and student classroom 

behavior
 were included in the process variables 
results. Studies describing the nature of 

interactions in inclusive physical education 

were selected for this section
.  Experiences of Students with Disabilities with 
Inclusion
 The purpose of a quality physical 
educa
tion programme is to direct and provide 

students with the knowledge and skills to be 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 53 physically active throughout their life (Block, 
2007).  Due to greater inclusion in schools 

physical education, teachers will engage 

students with and without disabiliti
es in the 
same class (Verderber et
 al.
, 2003).  It is 
important to question, however, whether these 

students want to be included in physical 

education and whether they experience the 

same level of physical education as their peers. 
 Goodwin and Watkinson (20
00) used a 
maximum variation purposeful sampling 

design when they looked at the experiences of 

nine elementary students with disabilities in 

inclusive physical education.  These students 

were wheelchair users in physical education 

(10-12 years old), data w
as collected through 
interviews, field notes and drawings.  Goodwin 

and Watkinson (2000) discussed the students 

experiences within the conceptual framework 

of ecological perception and affordance theory.  

Themes of sense of belonging, skilful 

participatio
n and sharing in the benefits were 
associated with good days.  In contrast, 

themes of social isolation, questioned 

competence and restricted participation were 

associated with bad days.  Results showed 

that students with disabilities preferred 

particip
ation in inclusive PE rather in 
segregated setting, or in special program. This 

study gave insight into the contributing factors 

of positive and negative experiences of 

students with disabilities. 
 Another study by Hutzler et al. (2002) 
explored the person
al experiences of children 

aged nine to fifteen with physical disabilities in 
physical education in Israel.  The purpose of 
the research was to identify supporting and 

limiting mechanisms with regard to the 

students inclusion and empowerment. 

Purposeful s
ampling was implemented with ten 
students (8 boys, 2 girls) most of whom were 

impaired by cerebral palsy.  Interviews were 

conducted in a semi
-structured manner with an 
eleven point rating scale.  Results illustrated 

that 60% of the students had been tease
d and 
ridiculed by other children, through imitating 

their walk, expressing pity or opening their 

brace.  Forty percents expressed that their peers 

had been supportive in physical education and 

twenty percents of students referred to having 
extracurricular
 interactions with other children 
with a disability, but they wouldnt like to be 

seen with them(page  number?). In regard to 

failures, over half of the comments from the 

students related to experiencing failure in 

physical activity. 
 But what about the 
other side of the coin? 
It is vital to explore the affect of inclusion on 

both students with and without disabilities.  

Faison
-Hodge and Porretta (2004) compared 
the physical activity levels of students with and 

without disabilities during physical educati
on 
and recess.  The school was purposively 

selected as it included students with mental 

retardation (MR) within a GPE class.  

Participants in this study were 46 fourth and 

fifth grade students (8 
 11 years) with eight 
students with mild intellectual disab
ilities. The 
students fitness levels were tested by
 the 
Fitnessgram Progressive Aerobic 

Cardiovascular Endurance Run (PACER).  

Students wore a heart
-rate monitor and were 
videotaped during physical education and 

recess.  Results indicated that students ha
d higher levels of moderate to vigorous physical 

activity (MVPA) during recess than physical 

education.  Students with low cardio
-
respiratory fitness and students with MR had 

similar levels in both physical education and 

recess.  Faison
-Hodge and Porretta 
(2004) 
suggest that these results may be due to 

students undergoing a fitness testing module in 

physical education. A lot of the time would 

have been spent on testing, writing results and 

assisting other students, while recess is free 
time and open choice 
of activities for the 
students with no instruction time.  Overall, the 

study highlights that students with MR can be 

included in physical education.  Due to the 

school previously including students with MR 

in their PE classes, these classes would not 

typic
ally represent the GPE.  The findings may 
not be transferable to all other schools for t
his 
reason and
 results are dependent in part on the 
severity of MR which can impact on the form 

of inclusion.
 Another study with positive corresponding 
results towards 
inclusion emerged from 

utilizing the Newcomb volleyball lead up game 

and an adapted version using a balloon.  
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 54 Kalyvas and Reid (2003) investigated the effect 
of sport adaptations on students with and 

without disabilities using a quasi
-experimental 
factoria
l design.  The factors being studied 

were participation and enjoyment of thirty five 

students aged seven to twelve, fifteen of which 

had a physical disability.   These students were 

split into three different classes for the 

purposes of the study.  Both th
e adapted and 

non-adapted games were played for fifteen 
minutes each for three classes.  A combination 

of systematic observations, individual 

interviews and questionnaires were used to 

collect the data.  Throughout the three classes 

students with disabilit
ies preferred the adapted 

game, discovering it to be more enjoyable and 

they felt that their peers were more cooperative 

and helpful during the game.  Statements of 

students without disabilities varied with age, 

the two younger classes enjoyed both games, 

finding the adapted game easier to play but still 

fun.  The older students without disabilities 

considered the use of a balloon frustrating as it 

was harder to win points and the pace of the 

game was slower.  All students did realise that 

the adapted game 
helped their peers with 

disabilities and did not have any objections to 

playing the adapted version.  Overall during the 

adapted game all students were skilfully 

successful and had greater activity levels, 

indicating that the adapted game did not hinder 

their performance.  Kalyvas and Reid (2003) 
believe that students with disabilities can be 

included in GPE programs once appropriate 

adaptations are made which do not compromise 
the experience for students without disabilities.  
If over a longer period of ti
me whilst using 
adapted games, this approach could have an 

effect on the attitudes, interest and participation 

of students with and without disabilities.
 The studies showed that experiences of 
students with disabilities greatly differ, some 

having good exp
eriences and others having bad 

ones.  Three of the studies focused on inclusion 

of students with physical disabilities while the 

fourth studied inclusion of students with 

intellectual disabilities.
 Peer tutoring in Inclusive Physical Education
 Peer tutor h
as been highlighted as an 
effective support tool that can be used to assist 
both the teacher and the student with 

disabilities. Fenrick and Peterson (1984) found 

that peer tutoring increased instructional time 

and helped to develop positive attitudes.  The
 successful training and implementation of peer 

tutors has provided encouraging results to
-date.
 Lieberman et
 al. (2000) explored the effect 
of peer tutors on the activity levels of deaf 

students in GPE.  Through the use of a 

purposeful sampling design, ei
ght deaf students 
were gender matched with eight typically 

developing peer students. Peer tutors were 

trained for four to five thirty minute sessions in 

sign language and basic teaching strategies.  

An assessment of the tutors competency was 

implemented t
hrough a theory and practical 

test.  In total of thirty two classes were 

observed over a five month period.  The 

System for Observing Fitness Instruction Time 

(SOFIT) was used to collect data.  A single 

subject delayed multiple baseline design across 

parti
cipants was employed. Results showed 
that there was an increase in moderate to 

vigorous activity levels (MVPA) for deaf 

students. Interestingly there was also an 

increase in the peer tutors MVPA.  All 

students increased their levels of MVPA by at 

least 19
%.  Lieberman and colleagues (2000) 
indicated their was a great deal of value added 

to  the peer tutors from studying teaching 

strategies and engaging in the process of  

feedback that ultimately helped them and 

motivate their disabled peers.  
 Klavina and 
Block (2008) studied the 
effect of nine trained peer tutors on the 
physical, instructional and social interaction 
behaviours of three students with severe and 

multiple disabilities (SMD) and peers without 

disabilities.  The study observed forty six GPE 

cla
sses.  Each class was forty five minutes in 

duration, two to three times a week and 

containing twenty five to thirty students.  Each 

class was videotaped with each SMD students 

wearing a microphone.  Three instructional 

support conditions for SMD were used
 throughout the study: teacher
-directed, peer
-directed and voluntary peer support.  The peer 

tutors underwent training, they used the Tip to 

Teach, Assist and Practice manual (TIP
-TAP 
steps).  After training, each peer tutor was 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 55 assessed through three tria
ls; a score of 90% 
had to be attained. The results showed that 
during the teacher
directed instructional 
condition, interaction behaviour between SMD 

students and other peers was low across all 

participants. In contrast, the interaction 

between adult suppo
rt personnel and SMD 

students was high.  During the peer
-mediated 
instructional condition, interaction behaviours 

with peer tutors had an immediate increase.  

Differing from the previous result, interaction 

behaviours with adult support personnel 

decreased
 for all students during the peer
-mediated instructional condition.  It was 

observed by teachers that students with SMD 

enjoyed being assisted by their classmates. 

Klavina and Block (2008)  have outlined that 

social interaction behaviours showed low 

result
s throughout the study, which could 
indicate students did not engage in 

conversations or in nonverbal interactions not 

related to GPE class.  During the voluntary 

peer support segment, the mean scores of 

interaction behaviours with other peers, not 

designa
ted as peer tutors increased for all 
students with SMD.  Inadvertently the 

teachers interaction behaviour decreased 

during voluntary peer support.  Overall positive 

results were denoted from this peer tutoring 

study from teachers, peer tutors and students
 with SMD.
 Most recently Klavina (2008) studied 
the 
effe
ct of peer
-mediated and teacher
-directed
 instructions on the activity engagement time of 

students with severe and multiple disabilities 
(SMD). She studied inclusive GPE sessions 
under two kinds of ins
tructional support 
conditions for three students with SMD: (a) 

teacher
-directed, and (b) peer
-mediated. 
Instructional behaviour data showed that 

during peer
-mediated support conditions the 
instructions provided by tutors were more 

frequent than instruction
s provided by teachers 

during teacher
-directed conditions. Physical 
behaviour data indicated that peer
-mediated 
conditions resulted in similar levels of physical 

behaviour for all students with SMD when 

compared to teachers directed conditions. Also, 

for a
ll students with SMD the activity 
engagement time data was higher in conditions 

where peer tutors were involved.
 Peer tutoring is an increasingly popular and 
highly successful strategy of support within 

physical education.  With appropriate training 

this r
esource could be developed to its 
maximum potential with all students 

benefiting
.   Social Interaction and Active Learning Time in 
Physical Education (ALT
-PE)
 Initially the topics of social interaction and 
ALT
-PE were highlighted as two separate 
areas, but
 due to a lack of articles 
corresponding to the research criteria, these 

have been combined.  The social interaction of 

students is a vital part of physical education.  

The sense of belonging within a group and 

creating friendships are valuable skills gain
ed and developed through social interaction 

(Moffett et al., 2006).  Therefore it is important 

to know whether students with and without 

disabilities, socially interact in physical 

education.
 To establish this Grenier (2006) 
investigated an inclusive physi
cal education 
class with sixteen students over a period of six 

months. One of the students had severe 

cerebral palsy and a visual impairment and the 

study used a social constructionist perspective.  

The data was sourced from interviews, 

observations, docum
ent review and journals.  
For the majority of the time, adaptations were 

made to include all students in the class.  When 

adaptations could not be created, the student 

with a disability did different activities but with 
similar goal outcomes to the rest of
 the class.  
Students were often paired for activities and a 
focus on both skill development and social 

interaction was promoted in the class.  Overall, 

the teaching was focused on the social 

interactions of students while learning and 

developing their ski
lls.  This led to greater 
acceptance and understanding of each other in 

the class.  The results from this study were 

highly positive but could this have primarily 

been due to the small class size.
 Place and Hodge (2001) studied the social 
inclusion of thre
e girls with physical 
disabilities and nineteen students without 

disabilities in GPE during a six week softball 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 56 unit.  Data was collected through observations, 
videotaping of classes and interviews.  

Analysis of data was conducted through the use 

of Academ
ic Learning Time for Physical 
Education (ALT
-PE) and the Analysis of 
Inclusion Practices in Physical Education Form 

S (AIPE
-S).  The students with disabilities did 
not receive any assistance in physical education 

but did in other subjects.  Results indicat
ed that 
students with and without disabilities rarely 

engaged in social interaction.  The students 

with physical disabilities tended to stay and 

work together in class, often at a distance from 

the other students.  Results also suggest the 

teacher did not 
emphasise any social 

interaction during the classes.  Students with 

disabilities often felt neglected and 

awkwardness was observed between students 

though there was communication observed 

between the two groups of student did talk.    

There was no demonstr
ation, praise or 
feedback provided by students with and 

without disabilities, but these interactions did 

take place between the students with 

disabilities themselves.  Overall during class 

time, the students with disabilities spent more 

time on
-task compar
ed to their peers.  It is 
evident from this study that social interaction 

needs to be encouraged and emphasised by 

GPE teachers. 
 Within the two contrasting studies, the 
teachers focus and goals played a pivotal role 

in the students opportunities for soc
ial 
interactions.  One of the studies explored the 

inclusion of a student with cerebral palsy and a 
visual impairment.  The second study looked at 
the inclusion of three students with physical 

disabilities. With only two studies in this 

section it highligh
ts the need for more research 
in this area
. Product Variables 
 Effectiveness of 
Inclusive Physical Education
 Various studies have outlined that students 
with disabilities can be included in GPE 

without any negative effects on the other 

students learning 
experience. In accordance 

with Dunkin and Biddle (1974) model that 

suggests studying immediate students growth 

and long
-term effects on learning in inclusive 
physical education, we have selected articles 
studying the effect of IPE on learning of 

students 
with and without disabilities. 
 Obrusnkov et al. (2003) investigated the 
effect of inclusion. They used a pre and post 

test evaluative case study design with a 

purposively selected sample. The aim was to 

evaluate the effect of including a student with 

muscular dystrophy who used a wheelchair into 
a GPE class of twenty one fourth grade 

students without disabilities where the student 

with a disability did not receive any direct 

support throughout the two weeks volleyball 

unit.  The non
-inclusive class compr
ised of 
eighteen fifth grade students.  Results from the 

skill and knowledge tests showed that both 

classes improved on all measures of skills, and 

there was no significant difference between the 

gains of the two classes.  The results of 

attitudinal questi
onnaire CAIPE
-R (Block, 
1995) results revealed that both groups had 

positive attitudes, but students in the inclusive 

class had slightly more accepting attitudes 

towards students with disabilities.  Overall 

there was no significant difference found 

between
 the inclusive and the non
-inclusive 
volleyball class.  The results of the study are 

however based upon a very short time frame 

for true attitude changes to take place.  A 

follow
-up study to see if the attitudes had been 
maintained or changed would provide
 more 
depth to the study.  
 In another study, Block et
 al. (2001) 
conducted a twelve week study to determine 

the effects of partner training by students 

without disabilities to students with severe 
multiple disabilities.  Twenty six students with 
severe mu
ltiple disabilities aged five to twenty 
one attending a Special Education school were 

partnered with twenty five partners from fifth 

and sixth grade students from a local school as 

part of the Special Olympics Motor Activities 

Training Program (MATP).  Pre
-testing of 
motor skills and interviews with parents was 

taken before the study began.  Partners having 

undertaken four hours of training were 

assigned to a particular student.  During the 

twelve weeks the teaching of the motor skills 

was solely the respon
sibility of the partner.  
Results showed significant improvement in 

motor skills and adaptive behaviours in 
OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 57 students after working with their partners.  
Observations were conducted by staff members 

and indicated that while partners and students 

were workin
g together, partners were quite 
talkative and students made more effort than 

usual.  Overall the study outlined that the 

training of students with severe multiple 

disabilities can be successfully carried out by 

fifth and sixth grade students once these 

stu
dents are adequately trained.  
 Similarly Ward and Ayvazo (2006) 
assessed the effects of class wide peer tutoring 

(CWPT) in teaching catching skills.  The 

school selected in this study specialized in the 

inclusion of students with autism.  Two 

students wit
hout disabilities and two students 
with autism in a kindergarten class of sixteen 

students were selected. Authors focused at the 

number of catches participants made during 

each session.  These results were used to 

identify the level of engagement and the w
ork 
completed by the students.  The second 

measure focused on the number of correct 

catching skills highlighting which students 

with disabilities were able to perform skills that 

their peers were performing.  Training of peer 

tutors was implemented in a si
ngle thirty 

minute session prior to the first intervention. 

The results indicated that the scores of 

performance and correct performance of the 

autistic students increased during peer tutoring 

session in comparison to their results during 

whole class instr
uction.  Overall the results 
were positive, but one might question whether 

it was primarily due to the individual assistance 
the students with autism received rather than 
successful inclusion process of these students
.  
DISCUSSION
 Currently at undergraduat
e level of 
Primary and PE teacher training, there is 

minimum specific training for APE (Morley et 

al., 2005).  Hands
-on practicum experiences in 
schools, knowledge of the various disabilities, 

instructional and curricular modifications are 

examples of key 
material that needs to be 

incorporated into teacher training. Greater 

flexibility is needed in the curriculum of the 

higher education institutions (Lieberman et al., 

2002, Smith, 2004).  Immediate intervention 
and re
-structuring of training in these 
instit
utions needs to be introduced 

(Douthwaite, 1990).  An example of one such 

program is the project European Inclusive 

Physical Education Training (www.eipet.eu). 

This focused on competencies of GPE teachers 

in relation to IPE and provides guidelines for 

higher education programme (curriculum) 
development.  
 Peer tutoring seems to be well developed 
and highly successful element of support in 

physical education (Block et al., 2001, Klavina 

and Block, 2008).  With correct training of the 

peer tutor students, i
t is evident that students 
with different types and severity of disabilities 

can be included in GPE (Block et al., 2001; 

Lieberman et al., 2000; Klavina, 2008).  Other 

programmes available to help build awareness, 

understanding and cooperation between 

stud
ents are the Paralympic School Day, 

Awareness Days and Special Olympics Unified 

Games.  Special needs assistants are 

increasingly being employed in schools in 

Ireland.  With increased training in IPE, this 

support could be maximised in assisting the 

studen
ts and the teacher (Davis et al., 2007).  
 APE specialists are a fundamental support 
and resource for including students with 

disabilities in GPE (Lytle & Hutchinson, 2004; 



Developing study programs at univer
sities and 
teacher training institutions specialising in 

Adapted Physical Education/Activity would be 

greatly beneficial.  Having study programs in 

APE would encourage more people to work in 
this area and raise the competence level of 
European professional
s. Various studies 
revealed in the review that teachers found 

including all students in outdoor lessons more 

difficult due to issues of accessibility (Morley 

et al, 2005). The facilities and equipment need 

to be adapted to ensure participation of all 

stude
nts (Fejgin et al., 2005). Research that 
mirrors that of Davis
 et 
al. (2007) is needed in 
Europe, to establish the current status and 

training needs of SEN assistants.  Peer tutoring 

studies could follow Klavina and Block (2008) 

and focusing on different p
eer tutoring 

interventions within the GPE environment.  
 OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 58 Research looking at the attitudes of GPE 
teachers, Primary teachers and students with 
and without disabilities is needed to identify 

the needs of European educators and students.  

Research investigat
ing the adequacy of the 
Primary and Physical Education teachers 

preparation and their willingness to develop an 

inclusive environment is critical if there is to be 

a positive future for inclusive physical 

education across the diverse and changing 

society 
that is contemporary Europe
.  Perspective Paragraph
 Inclusion in physical education can 
effectively work for the child with a disability 

(Goodwin & Watkinson, 2000) and it can work 

without negatively affecting peers without 

disabilities
 (Faison
-Hodge & Por
retta, 2004;
 Obrusnkov et al
., 2003). The success of 
inclusion is greatly increased when various 

factors such as support, personnel, training and 

positive attitudes exist.  Studies showed 

successful and positive inclusive practice could 

be achieved in GP
E even when sometimes all 
of the aforementioned factors were not readily 

available (Obrusnkov et al., 2003).  Europe is 

in the process of making a positive move 

towards greater inclusion of students with both 

mild to severe disabilities.  Legislation is 
the 

vital tool to success, as it creates the blueprints 

for schools and communities to follow. If 

governments and professional organisations in 

Europe will support inclusive PE ultimately the 

experience of GPE of students with disabilities 

is likely to imp
rove
.  REFERENCES
 Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned 
behavior. 
Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes
, 50, 179-211. BAALPE. (1996). 
Physical Education for 
Pupils with Special Educational Needs in 
Mainstream Education.
 West Midlands: The 
British Association of Advisors and 

Lecturers in Physical Education.
 Block, M. (1995). Development and 
validation of the childrens attitudes toward 

integrated physical education
-revised 
(CAIPE
-R) inventory. 
Adapted Physical 
Activity Quarterly, 12, 
60-77. Block, M.E, (2007). 
A Teacher's Guide to 
Including Students with Disabilities in 

General Physical Education. 
(3rd ed).
 Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
 Block, M.E., Conatser, P., Montgomery, R., 
Flynn, L., Munson, D., & Dease, R. (2001). 

Effects o
f Middle School
-Aged Partners on 
the Motor and Affective Behaviors of 

Students with Severe Disabilities. 
Palaestra, 
17 (4), 34
-39. Block, M.E, & Krebs, P. (1992). An 
Alternative to the Continuum of the Least 

Restrictive 
Adapted Physical 
Activity 
Quarterly
 , 9, 97-113. Block, M.E, & Obrusnkov, I. (2007). 
Inclusion in Physical Education: A Review 

of the Literature From 1995
-2005. Adapted 
Physical Activity Quarterly
 , 24, 103-124. Block, M.E, & Vogler, E.W. (1994). Inclusion 
in regular physical education: Th
e research 
base.  
Journal of Physical Education, 

Recreation and Dance, 65(1)
, 40-44. Davis, R.W., Kotecki, J.E., Harvey, M.W., & 
Oliver, A. (2007). Responsibilities and 

Training Needs of Paraeducators in Physical 

Education. 
Adapted Physical Activity 
Quarte
rly, 24,
 70-83. Douthwaite, R. (1990). Meeting Special 
Needs in Mainstream Schools: A Case 

Study.  
British Journal of Physical 

Education, 21 
(4), 393
-396.
 Dunkin, J. 
 Biddle, B. (1974). 
The Study of 
Teaching.
 New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston.  
 Faison
-Hodge, J., & Porretta, D.L. (2004). 
Physical Activity Levels of Students With 

Mental Retardation and Students Without 

Disabilities. 
Adapted Physical Activity 
Quarterly, 21, 
139-152. Fejgin, N., Talmor, R., & Erlich, I. (2005). 
Inclusion and burnout in phy
sical education. 
European Physical Education Review, Vol II 

(I)
, 29-50. Fenrick, N.J., & Peterson, T.K. (1984). 
Developing Positive Changes in Attitudes 

Towards Moderately/Severly Handicapped 

Students Through a Peer Tutoring Program. 

Education and Training
 of the Mentally 
Retarded, 19
, 83-90. OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 59 Goodwin, D.L., & Watkinson, E.J. (2000).  
Inclusive Physical Education From the 
Perspective of Students With Physical 

Disabilities. 
Adapted Physical Activity 
Quarterly, 17
, 144-160. Grenier, M. (2006). A Social Constru
ctionist 
Perspective of Teaching and Learning in 

Inclusive Physical Education. 
Adapted 

Physical Activity Quarterly, 23
, 245-260. Hardin & Brent. (2005). Physical Education 
Teachers' Reflections on Preparation for 

Inclusion. 
Physical Educator, 62 (1)
. Hodge
, S.R., Ammah, J.O.A., Casebolt, K., 
Lamaster, K., & O'Sullivan, M. (2004). 

High School General Physical Education 

Teachers' Behaviors and Beliefs Associated 

with Inclusion. 
Sport, Education and 
Society, 9
(3), 395
-419. Hodge, S.R, Murata, N.M., & Kozub, F.
M. 
(2002). Physical Educators' Judgements 

About Inclusion: A New Instrument for 

Preservice Teachers. 
Adapted Physical 
Education Quarterly, 19
, 435-452. Hodge, S.R., Tannehill, D., & Kluge, M.A. 
(2003). Exploring the Meaning of Practicum 

Experiences for PET
E Students. 
Adapted 
Physical Activity Quarterly, 20
, 381-399. Hutzler, Y., Fliess, O., Chacham, A., & Van 
den Auweele, Y. (2002). Perspectives of 

Children With Physical Disabilities on 

Inclusion and Empowerment: Supporting 

and Limiting Factors. 
Adapted Phy
sical 
Activity Quarterly, 19
, 300
-317. Kalyvas, V., & Reid, G. (2003). Sport 
Adaptation, Participation, and Enjoyment of 
Students With and Without Physical 
Disabilities. 
Adapted Physical Activity 
Quarterly, 20,
 182-199. Klavina, A. (2008). Using peer
-media
ted 
instructions for students with severe and 

multiple disabilities in inclusive physical 

education: A multiple case study. 
European 
Journal of Adapted Physical Activity, 1(2), 

719. Klavina, A. & Block, M.E. (2008).  The 
Effect of Peer Tutoring on Interac
tion 

Behaviors in Inclusive Physical Education. 

Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly, 25
, 
132-158. Kodish, S., Kulinna, P.H., Martin, J., 
Pangrazi, R. & Darst, P. (2006). 

Determinants of Physical Activity in an 

Inclusive Setting. 
Adapted Physical Activity 

Quarterly, 23, 
390-409. Kozub, F. M., Sherblom, P. R., & Perry, T. L. 
(1999). Inclusion Paradigms and 

Perspectives: A Stepping Stone to 

Accepting Learner Diversity In Physical 

Education. 
QUEST,
 51, 346
-354. 
Attitudes Toward Inclusion of Students with 

Physical Disabilities in Physical Education 

in the Revised "ATIPDPE
-R" 
Instrument/Scale for Prospective Czech 

Educators. 
Acta Universitatis Palackianae 
Olomucensis, 37
(1), 13
-18. 
about inclusion of children with disabilities 

into general physical education. 

Proceedings of European Congress of 

Adapted Physical Activities.
 (Available 
Online at www.eufapa.eu)
 
, D. 
 Sherrill, 
C. (2008). The nature of work and roles of  
      public school adapted physical educators in 
the United States. 
European Journal of  
      Adapted Physical Activity, 1(2),
 45-55. 
(2002). Componen
ts/Indicators of Attitudes 

Toward Inclusion of Students with Physical 

Disabilities in PE in the ATIPDPE 

Instrument/Scale for Prospective Czech 

Physical Educators. 
Acta Universitatis 
Palackianae Olomucensis, 32 (2),
 35-39.  Lieberman, L.J., Dunn, J.M., van 
der Mars, 
H., & McCubbin, J. (2000). Peer Tutors' 

Effects on Activity Levels of Deaf Students 

in Inclusive Elementary Physical Education. 

Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly, 17,
 20-39. Lieberman, L. J., & Houston
-Wilson, C. 
(2002). 
Strategies for Inclusio
n, A 
Handbook for Physcial Educators.
 U.S.A: 
Human Kinetics.
 Lieberman, L.J., Houston
-Wilson, C., & 
Kozub, F.M. (2002). Perceived Barriers to 

Including Students With Visual Impairments 

in General Physical Education. 
Adapted 

Physical Activity Quarterly, 19
, 364-377. OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 60 Lienert, C., Sherrill, C., & Myers, B. (2001). 
Physical Educator's Concerns About 
Integrating Children With Disabilities: A 

Cross
-Cultural Comparison. 
Adapted 
Physical Activity Quarterly, 18,
 1-17. Lytle, R.K., Collier, D. (2002). The 
Consultatio
n Process: Adapted Physical 
Education Specialists' Perceptions. 
Adapted 

Physical Activity Quarterly, 19,
 261-279. Lytle, R.K., & Hutchinson, G.E. (2004). 
Adapted Physical Educators: The Multiple 

Roles of Consultants. 
Adapted Physical 

Activity Quarterly, 21
, 34-49. Meegan, S., & MacPhail, A. (2006). Irish 
physical educators' attitude toward teaching 

students with special educational needs. 

European Physical Education Review
 , 12
 (1)
, 75-97. Miller, S. (1994). Inclusion of children with 
disabilities: can we m
eet the challenge? 

Physical Educator
 , 51 (1).
 Moffett, A.C., Alexander, M.G.F., & 
Dummer, G.M. (2006). Teaching Social 

Skills and  Assertiveness to Students with 

Disabilities. 
Teaching Elementary Physical 
Education,
 43-47. Morley, D., Bailey, R., Tan, J.,
 & Cooke, B. 
(2005). Inclusive Physical Education: 

teacher's views of including pupils with 

Special Educational Needs and/or 

disabilities in Physical Education. 
European 
Education Review
, Vol II(I), 84
-107. Murata, N.M., & Jansma, P. (1997). Influence 
of s
upport personnel on students with and 
without disabilties in general physical 
education. 
Clinical Kinesiology, 51 (2)
, 37-46. Obrusnkov, I., Vlkov, H., & Block, M.E. 
(2003). Impact of Inclusion in General 
Physical Education on Students Without 

Disabili
ties. 
Adapted Physical Activity 
Quarterly, 20, 
230-245. Place, K., & Hodge, S.R. (2001). Social 
Inclusion of Students With Physical 

Disabilities in General Physical Education: 

A Behavioral Analysis. 
Adapted  Physical 

Activity Quarterly, 18,
 389
-404. Sherri
ll, C. (2004).
 Adapted physical activity, 
recreation and sport: Crossdisciplinary and 

lifespan
 (6th ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw
-Hill Higher Education.
Smith, A. (2004). 
The inclusion of pupils with special 

educational needs in secondary school 

physical educati
on. Physical Education and 
Sport Pedagogy, 9 (1)
, 37
-53. Stainback, W., & Stainback, S. (1996).
 Inclusion: A Guide for Educators.
 Baltimore: Brookes Publishing Co.
   Verderber, J.M.S., Rizzo, T.L., & Sherrill, C. 
(2003). Assessing Students Intention to 

Par
ticipate in Inclusive Physical Education. 
Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly, 20,
 26-45. Ward, P., & Ayvazo, S. (2006).  Classwide 
Peer Tutoring in Physical Education: 

Assessing Its Effects With Kindergartners 

With Autism. 
Adapted Physical Activity 
Quarte
rly, 23,
 233-244.  
 Corresponding authors e
-mail address: 
martin.kudlacek@upol.cz
 
 
 The study has been supported by the research 

grant from Ministry of Education, Youth and 

Sports of the Czech Republic (No. M
SMT 
6198959221) Physical Activity and Inactivity 

of the Inhabitants of the Czech Republic in the 

Context of Behavioral Changes 
 OBrien
 et al.
 Review of Studies in Inclusive Physical Education
   EUJAPA, Vol. 
2, No. 1
 61 EIN LITERATURBERBLI
CK ZUR INKLUSION VON
 SCHLERN MIT 
BEHINDERUNGEN IN DER
 SCHULISCHEN BEWEGUNG
SERZIEHUNG AUS 
EUROPISCHER PERSPEK
TIVE
 (Resmee)
  Der Status der Inklusion von Schler/innen mit Behinderung im allgemeinen Unterricht fr 
Bewegung und Sport va
riiert stark ber die einzelnen Europischen Lnder, und in vielen Lndern 
steckt die inklusive Bewegungserziehung noch in den Kinderschuhen. Die Absicht dieser Studie ist 
es, einen berblick ber die in Englisch publizierte Literatur, die auf die Inklusio
n von 

Schler/innen mit und ohne Behinderung in der Bewegungserziehung fokussiert ist, zu geben 
 mit dem weiterfhrenden Anliegen, Empfehlungen zur Erleichterung der Inklusion in Europa zu 

entwickeln. Der berblick reicht ber einen Zeitraum von acht Jahr
en, beginnend mit 2000. Die 
Artikel hatten bestimmten Auswahlkriterien zu entsprechen. 27 Artikel entsprachen. Die 

vorgestellte Recherche basiert auf dem theoretischen Modell Study of Classroom Teaching (Dunkin 
 Biddle, 1974), das empfiehlt, dass Untersuc
hungen ber Lehren und Lernen vier Kategorien an 
Variablen einschlieen sollen: Personale Vorbedingung (Lehrer), Kontext (Schler), Prozess 
(Interaktion) und Produkt. Jede Grundkategorie von Variablen hat nachfolgende Untersektionen. 

Ein wichtiger Teil des
 berblicks sind Empfehlungen und Anleitungen an Praktiker in Adapted 
Physical Education, Bewegungserzieher und Schulverwalter ber ffentliche Grundstze und 

erfolgreiche Praxis der inklusiven Bewegungserziehung in Europa
.  SCHLSSELWRTER: 
Bewegungserzie
hung, Bewegung, Integration, Inklusion, Mainstream, 
Behinderung
.  
 REVUE DE LITTERATURE SUR LINCLUSION DES ELEVES EN SITUATION DE 
HANDICAP EN EPS SELON UNE PERSPECTIVE  EUROPENNE
 (Rsum)
  L'tat de l'intgration des lves handicaps en Education Physiq
ue et Sportive 
ordinaire
 varie 
selon les pays europens et dans de nombreux pays, l'ducation physique inclusive est encore aux 

premires tapes. Le but de cette tude est de mener une revue de la littrature publie en anglais 

portant sur l'intgration de
s lves handicaps ou non, en ducation physique, avec l'intention 
dlaborer des recommandations pour faciliter l'intgration en l'Europe. L'tude s'tend sur une 

priode de huit ans commenant au dbut de lanne 2000. Les articles devaient rpondre  d
es 

critres de slection pour tre inclus dans l'tude. Vingt
-sept articles ont rpondu aux critres. Notre 
revue de littrature sest appuye sur le modle thorique sur l'tude de l'enseignement en classe 

(Dunkin et Biddle, 1974) qui suggre que l'tude 
de  l'enseignement et de l'apprentissage concerne 
quatre catgories de variables: presage (enseignant), le contexte (les lves), le processus 

(interaction) et le produit. Chaque domaine cl de variables comprend des sous
-sections. Une partie 
importante de
 cette tude concerne des recommandations pour orienter les professionnels de 
l'ducation physique, les professeurs d'ducation physique et des administrateurs scolaires sur les 

politiques publiques, sur les bonnes pratiques lies  l'intgration en ducat
ion physique en Europe
.  MOTS CLEFS
 : Education physique, activit physique, intgration, inclusion, dficiences
. 