Reviewed Papers 
inroads  SIGCSE Bulletin - 138 - 
Volume 41, Number 2  2009 June 
   Reading a Computer Science Research Paper 
  Philip W. L. Fong 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Calgary 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4 
pwlfong@ucalgary.ca
  
 Abstract:  This tutorial article highlights some points that a gr
aduate or senior undergraduate student should bear in 
mind when reading a computer science research paper.  Specifically, the reading process is divided into three tasks: 
comprehension, evaluation and synthesis. 
 The genre of paper review is then introduced as a vehicle for critical reading 
of research papers.  Lastly, guidelines on 
how to be initiated into the trade of 
conference and/or journal paper review 
are given.
  Designed to be used in a graduate course setting, this
 tutorial comes with a suggested marking scheme for 
grading paper reviews with a summary-critique-synthesis structure.
  Categories and Subject Descriptors
:  K.3.2 [Computing Milieux]: Computer a
nd Information Science Education --- 
Computer science education.  
General Terms
:  Documentation 
Keywords:  
Graduate Education, Reading Research Papers, Paper Review
   1.  COMPREHENSION 
The first lesson to reading research papers is learning to 
understand what a paper says.  A common pitfall for a 
beginner is to focus solely on the technicalities.  Yes, 
technical contents are very important, but they are in no 
way the only focus of a careful reading.  In general, you 

should ask yourself the following four questions when you 
are reading a research paper. 
 1. What is the research problem the paper attempts 
to address?  What is the 
motivation
 of the research 
work?  Is there a 
crisis in the research 
eld that the 
paper attempts to resolve?  Is the research work 
attempting to overcome the 
weaknesses
 of existing 
approaches?  Is an existing 
research paradigm
 challenged?  In short, what is the 
niche
 of the paper? 
2. What are the claimed contributions of the paper?
  What is new in this paper?  A new 
question
 is asked?  
A new 
understanding
 of the research problem?  A new 
methodology
 for solving problems?  A new 
algorithm
?  A new breed of software 
tools
 or systems?  A new 
experimental method
?  A new 
proof technique
?  A new 
formalism
 or 
notation
?  A new 
evidence
 to substantiate 
or disprove a previously published claim?  A new 

research area
?  In short, what is 
innovative
 about this 
paper? 
3. How do the authors substantiate their claims? 
 What is the 
methodology
 adopted to substantiate the 
claims?  What is the 
argument
 of the paper?  What are 
the major 
theorems
?  What 
experiments
 are conducted?  
Data analyses
?  Simulations
?  Benchmarks
?  User 
studies
?  Case studies
? Examples
?  In short, what 
makes the claims 
scientic (as opposed to being mere 
opinions
1)? 
4. What are the conclusions? 
 What have we 
learned
 from the paper?  Shall the 
standard practice
 of the 
eld be changed as a result of the new 
ndings?  Is the 
result 
generalizable
?  Can the result be applied to 
other 
areas
 of the 
eld?  What are the 
open problems
?  In 
short, what are the 
lessons
 one can learn from the 
paper? 
 
Every well-written research paper contains an 
abstract, which is a summary of the paper. 
 The role of an abstract is 
to outline the answers to the above questions.  Look 

therefore, rst to the abstract for answers.  The paper 
should be an elaboration of the abstract. 
Another way of looking at paper reading is that every 
good paper tells a 
story.  Consequently, when you read a 
paper, ask yourself, What is the plot? The four questions 

listed above make up an archetypical plot structure for 
every research paper. 
 2.  EVALUATION 
An integral component of scholarship is to be critical of 
scientic claims.  Ambitious claims are usually easy to 
make but difficult to substantiate.  Solid scholarship 
involves careful validation of scienti
c claims.  Reading 
research papers is therefore an
 exercise of critical thinking. 
                                                 1 Alternatively, what makes it 
a research paper rather than 
science fiction? Reviewed Papers 
inroads  SIGCSE Bulletin - 139 - 
Volume 41, Number 2  2009 June 
o Is the research problem signi
cant?  Is the work scratching 
minor itches
?  Are the authors solving 
articial 
problems
 (aka 
straw man
)?  Does the work enable 
practical applications
, deepen 
understanding
, or explore 
new design space
? o Are the contributions signicant?  Is the paper 
worth 
reading
?  Are the authors simply 
repeating the state of 
the art?  Are there real 
surprises
?  Are the authors aware 
of the relation of their work to 
existing literature
1?  Is the 
paper addressing a well-known 
open problem
? o Are the claims valid?  Have the authors been 
cutting 
corners
 (intentionally or unintentionally)?  Has the right 
theorem been proven?  Errors in proofs?  Problematic 
experimental setup?  Confounding factors?  Unrealistic, 

articial benchmarks?  Comparing apples and oranges?  
Methodological misunderstanding?  Do the numbers add 
up?  Are generalizations valid?  Are the claims modest 

enough2?  When you evaluate a research work, two caveats are worth 

noting: 
o Consistently evaluating research works in a negative way 
gives a young researcher a false sense of being critical.  

Learn to be fair:  attend to both the strengths and 

weaknesses of the work. If you are reading a classical 
paper that has been published for a while, make sure you 
are reading the paper in the right historical context:  What 
seems to be obvious now might have been ground-

breaking then. o A young researcher may want to focus on point 3 (
Are 
the claims valid?
). Evaluating the signi
cance of the 
research problem and the contributions of the paper 
usually requires a comprehensive understanding of the 

research 
eld as a whole. Yet, do not let the above 
comment hinder you from disagreeing with the paper 
authors in matters of signi
cance. 
 3.  SYNTHESIS Creativity does not arise from 
the void.  Interacting with 
the scholarly community through reading research papers is 
one of the most effective ways for generating novel 
research agendas.  When you read a research paper, you 

should see it as an opportunity for you to come up with new 
research projects.  The following is a list of questions you 
can ask to help in this direction.  (Of course, this list is not 

supposed to be exhaustive.) 
o What is the crux of the research problem? 
                                                 1 Be very sceptical of
 work that is so 
novel that it bears no relation 
to any existing work, builds upon no existing paradigm, and yet addresses 
a research problem so significant that 
it promises to transform the world.  
Such are the signs that the author mi
ght not be aware of existing literature 
on the topic.  In such a case, the authors could very well be repeating 
works that have already 
been done decades ago. 2 It is very tempting for an inexpe
rienced researcher to make overly 
general conclusion from limited evid
ence.  A high quality scientific claim 
is always 
modest --- claiming only what can be concluded from the 
evidence, making explicit the limitati
on of the evidence, and carefully 
delimiting the scope of the claim. 
o What are some alternative way to substantiate the claim 
of the authors? 
o Is there an alternative way to substantiate the claim of the 

authors? 
o What is a good argument against the case made by the 

authors? 
o Can the research results be strengthened? 
o Can the research results be applied to another context? 
o What are the open problems raised by this work? 
 Bottom line:
  If you were to do the research, how would 
you do differently? 
 4.  PAPER REVIEW A paper review is a short essay (5 pages, single-space, 1-
inch margins, 12 point font) reporting what you have 
learned from reading a research paper.  Writing reviews for 
the papers you have read is a great way to sharpen your 
paper reading skills.  Such a review is typically structured 
in three sections  
summary
, critique
 and 
synthesis. 
1. Summary. 
 Give a brief summary of the work 
in your 
own words
.  This section demonstrates your 
understanding of the paper, and as such it should answer 
the four questions outlined in Section 1. The summary 

section should be structured as follows: (1) motivation, 
(2) contribution, (3) methodology and/or argument, and 
(4) conclusion. It is imperative that you use your own 

words to summarize the paper.  Failing to adhere to this 

guideline not only constitutes plagiarism, but also 

demonstrates that you probably do not quite understand 

the work.  You can be sure that you understand something 

only when you are capable of explaining it in your own 

words. 2. Critique.  Pick two to three points
3 you want to argue 
with the authors
4.  Use the questions outlined in Section 2 
to help you come up with meaningful critiques.  Do not 
repeat the Limitations
 section of the paper. Doing so 
means that you 
agree with the authors!  Pick points of 
disagreement
, and launch an intellectual debate with the 
authors.  Carefully articulate and substantiate your case.  
Do not just say, I dont like this point.  Instead, give 
technical reasons to substantiate your critiques.  Be 
specic in your choice of words.  Avoid generic 
adjectives such as bad, poor, lame, stupid, etc, 

and their synonyms and antonyms.  You can go a lot 

further by replacing such vague words with more speci
c                                                  3 This restriction on the number of cr
itiques is intentional.  Firstly, the 
restriction forces you to pinpoint the 
major weaknesses of the paper, rather 
than to spend efforts debating issues 
of peripheral importance.  Secondly, 
such a restriction allows you to en
joy the mental room necessary for 
developing a substantial case against the authors. 
4 Notice that the Critique section pr
esents only negative evaluations of 
the paper.  Have we forgotten about 
being fair to a research work?  No, 
positive evaluations are omitted for a good reason.  Experience tells us 
that students thend to give positive evaluation in the following form: I 
agree with the authors.  They did this and that, and they did a good job.  

The end result is usually a repetition of the authors' claims.  I find that 

focusing on critiques offers a more su
bstantial learning experience to the students, forcing them to th
ink rather than to parrot. Reviewed Papers 
inroads  SIGCSE Bulletin - 140 - 
Volume 41, Number 2  2009 June 
ones:  inelegant, inefficient, memory-intensive, 
ill-dened, etc. 3. Synthesis.
  Propose one to two ways in which the 
research work can be further developed.  Do not repeat 

the Future Work
 section of the paper.  Be original.  
Consult the list of questions in Section 3 if you run out of 
ideas.   I use this format when I ask students in my graduate classes 
to review a paper. Consult the Appendix for a sample 
outline, a marking scheme, and page length suggestions.  
 5. AN ALTERNATIVE PAPER REVIEW FORMAT 
The format of paper review outlined in the previous section 
is the one I adopt for my graduate classes.  It works for me, 

but it is de
nitely not the only way to structure a paper 
review.  I outline here an alternative format I learned from 

a friend of mine.  
1. What is the purpose of the work? 
2. How do the authors achieve this purpose?  Why is this 
particular approach adopted? 
3. Do you think the purpose has been achieved? 
4. What insights have you gained from reading this work? 
 Notice the parallel between this alternative structure and 
the summary-critique-synthesis 
structure in the previous 
section. 
   6. READING RESEARCH PAPERS LIKE A PRO 
When a research paper is submitted to a conference or a 
journal, it will undergo a 
peer review
 process, in which the 
paper is subject to the intense scrutiny of peer researchers.  
The referees
 who review the submitted paper will read the 
paper in more or less the same way as we outlined in Sections 
1 and 2, and then they will write up a 
referee report
 in a style 
similar to the paper review discussed in Section 4, except for 

the synthesis section.  Based on the referee reports, the 

program chair of a conference or the editor of a journal will 

then make the decision of whether to accept the paper.  It is 

therefore instructional to understand how a referee go about 

reviewing a paper, and learn to read research papers like a 

professional.  A very good introduction to the subject can be 

found in an article by Smith [1].  The paper is slanted towards 
experimental computer science.  For a perspective focusing on 

theoretical computer science, consult the article by Parberry 

[2].  After reading these papers, I highly recommend graduate 

students to 
nd opportunities to practice professional paper 
reviewing.  Your thesis supervisor will likely be involved in 

the program committees of conferences, or asked to review 

papers for conferences.  Approach your supervisors, and 

volunteer to help out with paper reviews.  By actually writing 

up a professional review report, and discussing your review 

with your supervisor, you will gain tremendous insight into the 

paper publishing process, as well as the implicit value system 

of the academic world.  This kind of training is hard to acquire 

through other means. 
 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[1] Alan Jay Smith, The 
task of the referee, 
IEEE Computer
, 23(4):65-71, April 1990. 
[2] Ian Parberry, A guide for new referees in theoretical computer science, 
Information and Computation
, 112(1):96-116, July 1995. 
   APPENDIX: MARKING SCHEME AND OUTLINE OF A PAPER REVIEW 
1. SUMMARY (40%: 2.5 pages) 
a. Motivation (8%) 
b. Contribution (8%) 
c. Methodology (16%) 
d. Conclusion (8%) 
2. CRITIQUE (30%: 1.5 pages) 
a. 1st Critique (15%) 
b. 2nd Critique (15%) 
c. Optional: 3
rd Idea 
 If a 3rd critique is given, then each critique is worth 10%.  Students ar
e encouraged to focus their efforts in two rather than three c
ritiques. 3. SYNTHESIS (30%: 1 page) 

a. 1st Idea (30%) b. Optional: 2
nd Idea 
 If a 2nd idea is presented, then each idea is worth 15%.  Students ar
e encouraged to focus their efforts on one rather than two ideas. 
 