Keywords: Social networking sites (SNS); Social media; Academics;
Health; Awareness; Privacy; Security policies
Introduction
In this era of technology, Internet plays a dynamic role in 
almost every eld of life. rough internet, users can communicate 
with each other using dierent platforms. Students use this facility 

for communication, preparing dierent projects, assignment and 

presentations. ere are dierent platforms for dierent purposes. 

For formal communication users usually use Gmail, Yahoo mail or 

Hotmail. For casual talks or sharing dierent kind of stu users prefer 

Facebook, twitter or Instagram. For contacting someone urgently users 

avail the facility of WhatsApp. For online streaming users use YouTube. 

And for online games, users go to miniclip or blizzard entertainment.
Social media is a concept based on a platform for the people around 
the world to discuss their issues and opinions and exchange information. 

And social networking sites (SNS) are basically those tools that allows 

the people to exchange information, ideas, images, videos and much 

more through a specic network. Few examples of SNS are Facebook, 

Twitter, YouTube, Blizzard Entertainment, WhatsApp etc. SNS provide 

its users a facility to create their own prole with their own list of users. 

With this list of users, the person can connect at that specic platform 

and that platform oers dierent features like chatting, blogging, audio 

and video calling, mobile connectivity and video and photo sharing.
Facebook provides its users to make their own prole. Besides this, 
the users can create a page or group, which can be used for marketing 

purpose or educational purpose etc. Facebook also provides dierent 

facilities like; blocking, following, posting, commenting, liking, 

sharing, messaging and audio/video calls. Using twitter, a user can 

make an account and then can avail the facility of tweeting, retweeting, 

messaging and adding other users as followers.
Instagram users post pictures to let their followers know what is 
happening around them. e followers can like comment and share 

the posts. You Tube is a platform where users make channels and then 

upload videos. e viewers watch the videos and can report, dislike, 

like, comment and share the video on other social platforms. e 

users can search any video by its name as well. Gamers who use online 

gaming platforms avail the facility of multiplayers gaming mode and 

besides that they can chat with each other. In this paper we will review 

the past literature available to understand the role of social media in 

students life and then we will nd out the positive and negative impacts 

of social networking platforms on students physical and psychological 

health and also how it aects the students academics in Pakistan.
Literature Review
According to OKeee GS and Clarke-Pearson K [1], social media 
impacted more in negative side. It includes accessing inappropriate 

contents without understanding the privacy policies. ey also said that 

aer the introduction of social media, there is more online harassment 

and cyberbullying.
Ahn J [2] while doing research presented a theory known as 
Signaling eory. According to her theory, an individual while trying 

to make himself/herself popular adds so many unknown users as his/

her friend, and this is how an individual compromises their own trust 

and privacy.
Rideout V [3] said that the youth is spending more time on social 
media just for entertainment purpose. She told that an American child 

on average spends 7-8 hours a day, just for entertainment and usually 

multi-task between dierent social networks they use.
Pardo A [4] has made an eort to explain social medias importance 
in students life. He said that such platforms allow students to 

communicate with each other for sharing information and teachers as 

well. Pardo states that such kind of interactions are necessary for people 

to learn new things.
Cain J and Chretien K [5] introduced a new term interprofessional 
education. It is dened as when dierent individuals come together 

on a single platform to share knowledge which leads to improved and 

better understanding as they are learning from each others experiences.
El-Badawy TA and Hashem Y [6] in their research concluded that 
social media has no relationship with students academic performance. 

And there is no impact (positive or negative) on students academic 

routine.
According to Tariq W and Mehboob M [7], social media is ruining 
the future and carrier of students. It distracts students from their 
Hassan Khalid*Department of Computer Science, Abdul Wali Khan University, Mardan, Pakistan
AbstractIn the present world of technology, Internet plays a vital role in students life. Students use the internet facility 
for dierent purposes i.e., communication, preparation, acquiring knowledge, entertainment etc. In this research, 
our task is to nd the impact of social networks on students physical and psychological health. We also nd that 

how social networks impact the academics of students. Lastly, we discuss how youngsters got compromised by their 

personal and private data. In the end, we gured out that the excessive use of social networks eect the students 

physical and psychological health negatively. Social Networking Platforms have a positive impact on their academics. 

A number of students have been harassed and their personal data has been misused due to lack of knowledge about 

security and privacy policies. erefore, we suggested that social media should be taught as a subject or at a workshop/

seminar for the awareness of cybercrimes and the policies (security and privacy both).
*Corresponding author:
 Hassan Khalid, Department of Computer Science,

Abdul Wali Khan University, Mardan, Pakistan, Tel: +923355823363; E-mail:

malikhasankhalid@gmail.comReceived June 14, 2017
; Accepted August 01, 2017
; Published August 07, 2017Citation: Khalid H (2017) 
The Effects of Social Networks on Pakistani Students. 
J Inform Tech Softw Eng 7: 203. doi: 10.4172/2165-7866.1000203

Copyright:  2017 
Khalid H. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and 

source are credited.Journal ofInformation Technology & Software EngineeringJournal of Information Technology &Software EngineeringISSN: 2165-7866Page 2 of 6studies. Further on, they analyzed the data collected from a survey that 
there is a very large number users using social media with multiple IDs 

(real and fake one). Lastly they said that in Pakistan there are no such 

laws for social networking sites to be followed. 
Kalia G [8] in her research paper concluded that the students should 
be engaged on a social platform with each other to learn better and 

more. Teachers should help kids to understand what social media is? 
and its fair use. Finally she said that social media is an entertainment 
world but it can also be used for educative and professional purposes.
Shahjahan ATM and Chisty KU [9] came to the conclusion that 
the overall eect of social media on teenagers is negative. Because of 
addiction to social platforms, students usually get low grades. Parents 
are not aware of their childrens social accounts and their policies, which 

aect them later on. e teenager lack condence and try to avoid face-
to-face communications.
Siddiqui S and Singh T [10] discussed both the positive and negative 
aspects of social media. Students can make a group of their class on any 

social platform where they can discuss and express themselves. ey 
can share useful information by using that specic platform. ey can 
explore the opportunities for their future. But it also distract students 

from their academics. Teenagers are not completely aware of the terms 

and policies and that social platform. And they misuse it by creating 

fake accounts for fun purposes and later on get addicted to it.
Khurana N [11] discovered that in India 66% of the youth uses 
social platforms for at least 2 hours a day. He also discovered that a 

very large number of youngsters have been victimized by cyber-

crimes. And nally he concluded that it all happens just because of not 

understanding the terms and conditions properly.
Zeitel-Bank N [12] in her paper summarized that social platforms 
provide us the opportunity to share a local news and make it a global 

one. But if one business rm spread a fake news about his rival, it hardly 

take minutes to damage the companys reputation and shares. And same 

is the scene in politics, one viral video can have a huge impact on you 

individually and distributed as well.
Mingle J and Adams M [13] came to the conclusion that besides the 
positive impact of social media on students academics, it is dangerous 
in many ways. It distracts students from their studies and students get 
addicted to social networks unconsciously because of its extremely 
user- friendly interface. And it later on aects the grades of students.
Wang Q, et al. [14] conducted a survey in which they found out that 
Facebook is the most popular social platform. Students spent vast hours 

checking social media posts. Students use social platforms during their 
classes, using their cell phones. 90% of the students use social networks 
for entertainment purposes only. It aects the eciencies and their 

grades as well. Social platforms distract students from their academics 
because of its attractive and user-friendly interface.
Abdulahi A, et al. [15] did a research on the negative eects of social 
networking platforms. ey found out that students also use social 
platforms on their cell phones during the lectures. e fact that students 
miss their lectures leads them to low grades in academics. Slowly, social 
networking sites also lead them to get addicted to it, and then users 
use it day and night. is aects the students health. In hope of getting 
more friends, users usually share their own personal data, which later 
on can be misused and they compromise their privacy and security.
Li Y [16] in his research concluded that social networking platform 
itself is a mass-oriented, social and value-neutral. eir value depends 
upon the users application. ere is much messy, mixed, false and 
untrue information on social platforms, which cannot fully meet the 
demands of students in China. It also adds risks for students with 

regards to their privacy and security.
Chanchalor S, et al. [17] had done a detailed quantitative research 
regarding the eects of online gaming on the health eects of online 
gamers. e symptom of drowsiness and dizziness was the rst 

disorder, then insomnia, annoyance, pain in the occipital bone or back. 
e least symptom was avoidance of their social contacts. ey also 
concluded that students who played violent games decreased on EQ, 
sympathy, responsibility, decision making and good relationship. And 
those students who play less violent games has no positive eect on EQ.
Fu-Yun Y and Yu-Hsin L [18] worked on using social media 
(Facebook) as a teaching and learning tool for in-class Q&A activities.
ey performed a survey and aer data analysis, four features were 
identied: enhanced social interaction, more focused learning, more 
amiable classroom environment and deepened thinking about the 
awareness of the complexity of the study topic
Leelathakul N and Chaioah K [19] studied the eects of using 
Facebook as an educational tool for students to acquire knowledge. 
ey explored the correlation between dierent Facebook activities 
and students performances in classes. ey concluded that Facebook is 

good for students as a learning tool and they also said that an individual 
activity aspect is not linearly correlated with students result.
 De Silva E and De Silva EC [20] in their research discussed the 
importance of multidisciplinary approach in online classrooms, and 
to create a learner-centered environment for the students for their 
clear focus on what they are going to learn, why they are learning 
and what competencies are expected. ey also concluded that with 

multidisciplinary approach student will be able to identify pragmatic 
solutions to common problems through interaction, interconnection 
and integration with other elds.
Purpose of the Study
e purpose of the study is to understand the dierence between 
social media and social networking sites. en we will discuss 
its impact on students academics, physical health, psychological 

health and security and privacy issues. Finally we will present our 

recommendations aer discussing the results and conclusions.
Results and Discussion 
We have arranged a survey, in which we asked the respondents 
dierent questions regarding social networking sites and its upshots. 

Our targeted audience was mostly students aged between 16-26. Our 

total responses were 100.
Aer getting the data from survey, we statistically analyzed all the 
questions with respect to their variance, standard deviation, mean, 

standard error and satisfaction rate.
Lastly, we took the average of all the values for referencing in our 
paper. e values are given below:
Variance: 6.18
Standard deviation= : 1.50
Mean=  
 or : 3.06
Standard error: 0.15

Satisfaction rate: 56.38
Page 3 of 6Popular social platform
When we ask the students that which platforms they use? ey told 
us that, in the present world of technology everyone uses some kind 
of social network for some purpose. Few of us use social networks for 

acquiring knowledge, some people use for making new friends around 
the globe, few of us use to make themselves updated regarding the events 
occurred in the classes like assignment or presentations etc. Some of 

the students use social platforms for entertainment purpose. 33% of 
the students use Facebook, 23% use WhatsApp, 21% use YouTube, 12% 
Instagram, 9% Twitter and 2% other social platforms i.e., snapchat and 
Imo (Figure 1).
Purpose of using social networks
Students use social networks for many reasons, like online gaming, 
chatting with their friends, watching movies/videos, making new 
friends, learning something new, doing assignment etc. According to 
our survey, 40% of the student use the social networking platforms 

for entertainment purposes, which further includes online gaming, 

chatting, watching online videos etc. 35% use social networking 
platforms for educative purposes. It includes watching online tutorials 
regarding their courses, reading online material etc. 20% students use 
social platforms to keep themselves updated regarding the current 

activities in their classes. Like presentation updates, assignment and its 

deadlines etc. Only 5% students are interested in making new friends 

around the globe. e purpose of these students is to learn their culture 

and if they have any scope in dierent countries for jobs or further 

education (Figure 2). 
Awareness about the terms and policies
When the students were asked that are you aware of the terms and 
policies of the network/platform you are using, 71% of the students 

refused that they are not aware of the terms and policies of the social 

networks they are using. 29% students agreed that they understand the 

terms and policies of the social networking platforms they are using 

(Figure 3).
Impact of social networking platforms on academics
73% of the responses quoted that social networking platforms play 
a positive role in our academics. Social platforms have a positive impact 

on our studies during the exams as well. Just 27% have the negative 

opinion. ey think that social platforms usually distracts us from 
 Figure 1: Popular social network. Figure 2: Purpose of using social networks.Figure 3: Awareness regarding the terms and policies of social platforms they 

are using.our studies, especially during exams (Figure 4). 60% think that SNS 

play a negative role, when we talk about the psychological health of 

students. ey think that online gamers are the people who are aected 

negatively by the extreme use of SNS. For other users, whenever any 

platform becomes an addiction, it will aect their psychology in a 

negative way (Figure 5).
Impact of social networking platforms on physical health
According to 70% of our respondents, SNS has a negative impact on 
their physical health. ey think that once you get addicted to any social 
platform, then it will aect your time and physical health negatively. 
30% said that it has a positive impact on their physical health. ey 
think that if we use social platforms in a balanced way, then it will not 

aect your physical health negatively (Figure 6).
How to spread awareness regarding social networks
When the students were asked about the ways or techniques to 
spread awareness regarding dierent aspects/ dimensions of Social 
Media and Social Networking Platforms. 24% of the students thought 

that it should be taught as a subject in schools or colleges. 33% suggested 

that in a workshop, the students should taught dierent dimensions of 

social media and also make them understand the security and privacy 

policies. 43% advised that during a seminar at dierent schools, colleges 
Page 4 of 6 Figure 4: Impact of social networking platforms on academics. Figure 5: Impact of social networking platforms on physical health. Figure 6: Impact of social networking platforms on psychological health.and universities, the positive and negative aspects of using SNS should 
be discussed. By doing this, we can also spread awareness regarding 

dierent issues related to social networks.
Impact of social networking platforms on psychological 

health
According to 40% of our respondents, SNS have a positive impact 
on students psychological health (Figure 7).
Cybercrimes
During the survey, we asked the students about the cybercrimes. 
ey told us that we have heard people doing dierent illegal 
activities, like misuse of someones personal data, using fake-ids and 

impersonation. 22% agrees that they have seen fake-ids on dierent 

social networks. 11% agreed that sometimes data has been misused for 
dierent purposes as well as for illegal activities. Only 2% mentioned 

the crime impersonation. 64% respondents told us that all the crimes 
are present in todays world (Figure 8).
Awareness to cybercrimes
Regarding the above question about the cybercrimes, we asked the 
students about any kind of exposure to any cybercrime. 89% answered 
the question negatively. Just 11% responded positively (Figure 9). Aer 
understanding the analyzed data from the survey, we understand the 
purpose of the students to use SNS. Secondly, we also got to know 

about the unawareness regarding dierent dimensions of using social 

platforms. Lastly, we concluded that the new generation is indierent 

to cybercrimes. Students who spend more time on social platforms are 
trying to get more socialized and because of this, they get addicted to a 
social platform, which slowly aects their health.
Future Work
In my opinion, the current research work lays down reasonably 
 Figure 7: Way to spread awareness among students regarding social media.
Figure 8: Common aspects of cybercrimes related to the students.Page 5 of 6good foundations for the futuristic research work particularly in the 
dimensions as shown in the gure given below (Figure 10).
Conclusion
In the end we will discuss the concluded facts, which we discovered 
from reviewing the past literature and by doing the survey through 
a questionnaire. At the end we will give certain suggestions to be 
followed to make the students health and life safer. First thing we 

discovered was that in Pakistan, every student is using some kind 
of platform for socializing as well as for academic and educational 
purposes. Most of the students have accounts on Facebook and use 

YouTube for dierent purposes. If the students use these platforms 
in a balanced way, it will not harm their health. Secondly, we found 
out that there is a huge number of users who are unaware of the terms 

and policies of the social networks they are using. Most of the time, 
the users download the applications on their mobile phones and they 
without reading the terms and conditions press OK/Allow button to 

download their desired applications. Understanding the terms and 
policies of any platform is very much important. It can aect someones 
security and privacy negatively. irdly, we came to the conclusion that 

social networks plays a positive role in students academic activities. 
Especially using Facebook, classmates make a group and share the 
lectures, presentations, assignments on that group. During exams, 

they share important questions etc. it helps the whole class to know 

and to understand the issues or problems in detail. e next thing we 

discovered was that using social platforms for entertainment purposes 

has a negative impact on students physical health. ose users who 

plays online games and those who are addict to any social platform 

become physically sick. Dierent kinds of symptoms have been 

observed like dizziness, drowsiness, insomnia, annoyance and pain in 

the occipital bone of back. In some cases, they become so unsocial in 

their real lives that they ignore meeting face to face with their friends 

and family. We also got to know that excessive use of social platforms or 

playing online games for a longer duration also aect your psychological 
health negatively. We found out that students who spent more than ve 
hours surng on dierent social platforms and playing online games 

are aected by psychological health issues like stress, mood disorder, 

anxiety disorder etc. We gured out that there is a large number of social 
networks users who are actually not aware of the terms and policies of 
the platform, they are using. It can further lead them being victimized 
by cyber experts, as well as they also face problems with their personal 

data being misused in dierent ways. We concluded that this generation 

is a quite indierent to cybercrimes. ey are not interested in what 

kind of crimes are going on around them. eir posts contain violent 

material and they feel happy when other users react to their posts. 

Everyone is aware of dierent kinds of cybercrimes like fake Ids, fake 

news, libel, misuse of personal stu and impersonation. But most of the 

time students do not take such things seriously. Lastly, we discovered 

that Social Media is as deep as an ocean. erefore it should be taught 

properly whether as a subject or through seminars or workshops. It is 

imperative to spread awareness regarding dierent dimensions of social 

media. Some of them are given below:
Pros and cons of using social platforms. 
Proper and legal use of social networks.
Understanding the terms and policies of dierent social 
networks.
How to keep your account secure and safe?
 Recommendations After discussing the results and giving the conclusion, we recommend the 

following things to be noted and acted upon to have a better and safer 

future: Age limit: There should be age limit to the users of different social platforms.
 Parental guidance and check: Parents should have a little check on their 

kids as well as guide them, so that they use such platforms in a proper 

manner to avoid the imbalance in their physical and psychological health. General awareness: The awareness should be spread around, to 
understand the social networks properly.
 Teaching social media: Social Media should be taught as a subject or during 

a workshop or at a seminar.
 Awareness regarding cybercrimes: students should learn how to secure 

their accounts from different cyber-attacks and what to do if they get 
victimized. Awareness regarding terms and policies: Students should also learn and 
understand the terms and policies of all the social platforms they have been 
signed up.References1. O'Keefe GS, Clarke-Pearson K (2011) The Impact of Social Media on Children, 
Adolescents, and Families. Pediatrics 127: 800-804.2. Ahn J (2011) The Effect of Social Network Sites on Adolescents Social and 
 Figure 9: Exposed to any dimension of cybercrimes.Figure 10: Prospects of future work.Page 6 of 6Academic Development: Current Theories and Controversies. J Am Soc Inf Sci 
Technol 62: 1435-1445.
3.Rideout V (2012) Social Media, Social Life: How Teens View Their Digital Lives. 
Common Sense Media.4.Pardo A (2013) Social Learning Graphs: Combining Social Network Graphs
and Analytics to Represent Learning Experiences. Int J Social Media and

Interactive Learning Environments 1: 43-58.5.Cain J, Chretien K (2013) Exploring Social Media's Potential in Interprofessional 
Education. Journal of Research in Interprofessional Practice and Education.6.El-Badawy TA, Hashem Y (2015) The Impact of Social Media on Academic
Development of School Students. International Journal of Business

Administration 6: 46-52.7.Tariq W, Mehboob M, Khan M, FaseeUllah (2012) The Impact of Social Media
and Social Networks on Education and Students on Pakistan. International
Journal of Computer Science Issues 9:  407-411.8. Kalia G (2013) A Research Paper on Social Media: An Innovative Educational
Tool. Issues and Ideas in Education 1: 43-50.
9. Shahjahan ATM, Chisty KU (2014) Social Media Research and its Effects on
Our Society. International Journal of Social, Behavioral, Educational, Economic, 

Business and Industrial Engineering 8: 2009-2013.10. Siddiqui SS, Singh T (2016) Social Media its Impact with Positive and Negative 
Aspects. International Journal of Computer Applications Technology and

Research 5: 71-75.11.
 Khurana N (2015) The Impact of Social Networking Sites on the Youth. JMCL
5: 1-4.12. Zeitel-Bank N, Tat U (2014) Social Media and its Effects on Individuals and
Social Systems. Portoroz, Slovenia: Human Capital without Borders, pp: 1183-

1190.
13. Mingle J, Adams DM (2015) Social Media Network Participation and Academic 
Performance in Senior High Schools in Ghana. Library Philosophy and Practice 

(EJournal), pp: 1-51.14. Wang Q, Chen W, Liang Y (2011) The Effects of Social Media on College
Students. 15. Abdulahi A, Samadi B, Gharleghi B (2014) A Study on the Negative Effects

Scholars in Malaysia. Int J Bus Soc Sci 5: 133-145.16. Li Y (2011) Survey on Situation of Chinese College Students Choosing To Use 
Social Networking. IEEE, Computer Research and Development (ICCRD),

2011 3rd International Conference. pp: 344-348.
17. Chanchalor S, Konsue S, Chanchalor O (2012) Health Effects of Playing
Online Game: Vocational and Technical Students on Thailand. International

Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics, pp: 120-122.18. Yu FY, Liu YH (2015) Social Media as a Teaching and Learning Tool for In-
Class Q&A Activities to Promote Learning and Transform College Engineering

Classroom Dynamics: The Case of Facebook. International Conference on

Advanced Learning Technologies.
19. Leelathakul N, Chaipah K (2013) Quantitative Effects of using Facebook as
a Learning Tool on Students' Performance. International Joint Conference on

Computer Science and Software Engineering (JCSSE).20. DeSilva E, DeSilva EC (2014) Online Teaching: A Comparison of On-Ground,
Online & Facebook-linked Teaching. International Conference on Interactive

Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning (IMCL) 338-341.
